<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Sumerian Liturgies and Psalms</title>
      <author><name reg="Langdon, Stephen">Stephen Langdon</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>April 10, 2010</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">31935</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2010-04-10">April 10, 2010</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Suzanne Lybarger, Brian James, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Sumerian Liturgies and Psalms</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Stephen Langdon</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Professor of Assyriology</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">at Oxford University</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Philadelphia</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Published by The University Museum</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1919</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Introduction.</head>

<p>
[Transcriber's Note: This e-book is Number 4 of Volume X of a series, which
had a single page numbering system throughout the Volume. Thus, although this
e-book is pages 233 through 351, it contains references to pages outside of this
range in the same Volume.]
</p>

<p>
With the publication of the texts included in this the last
part of volume X, <hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Liturgical and Epical Texts</hi>, the
writer arrives at a definite stage in the interpretation of the
religious material in the Nippur collection. Having been privileged
to examine the collection in Philadelphia as well as that
in Constantinople, I write with a sense of responsibility in
giving to the public a brief statement concerning what the
temple library of ancient Nippur really contained. Omitting the
branches pertaining to history, law, grammar and mathematics,
the following <hi rend='italic'>résumé</hi> is limited to those tablets which, because
of their bearing upon the history of religion, especially upon
the origins of Hebrew religion, have attracted the attention of
the public on two continents to the collections of the University
Museum.
</p>

<p>
Undoubtedly the group of texts which have the most human
interest and greatest literary value is the epical group, designated
in Sumerian by the rubric <hi rend='italic'>zag-sal</hi>.<note place='foot'>In
addition to the examples of epical poems and hymns cited on pages 103-5 of this volume
note the long mythological hymn to <ref target='innini-3'>Innini, No. 3</ref>
and the hymn to Enlil, No. 10 of this
part. An unpublished hymn to Enlil, Ni. 9862, ends <hi rend='italic'>a-a
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>En-lil zag-sal</hi>, <q>O praise father Enlil.</q>
For Ni. 13859, cited above p. 104, see <hi rend='smallcaps'>Poebel</hi>, PBS. V No.
26.</note> This literary term
was employed by the Sumerian scribes to designate a composition
as didactic and theological. Religious texts of such
kind are generally composed in an easy and graceful style
and, although somewhat influenced by liturgical mannerisms,
may be readily distinguished from the hymns and psalms
sung in the temples to musical accompaniment. The <hi rend='italic'>zagsal</hi>
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
compositions<note place='foot'>So far as the term is properly applied. Being of didactic
import it was finally attached to grammatical texts in the phrase
<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Nidaba
zag-sal</hi>, <q>O praise Nidaba,</q> i. e., praise the patroness
of writing.</note> are mythological and theological treatises concerning
the deeds and characters of the great gods. The most
important didactic hymns of the Nippur collection and in fact
the most important religious texts in early Sumerian literature
are two six column tablets, one (very incomplete) on the Creation
and the Flood published by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Dr. Poebel</hi>, and one (all but
complete) on Paradise and the Fall of Man. Next in importance is
a large six column tablet containing a mythological and didactic
hymn on the characteristics of the virgin mother
goddess.<note place='foot'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Poebel</hi>, PBS.
V No. 25; translated in the writer's
<hi rend='italic'>Le Poème Sumérien du Paradis</hi>, 220-257.
Note also a similar epical poem to Innini partial duplicate of
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Poebel</hi> No. 25 in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Myhrman's</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Babylonian Hymns and Prayers</hi>, No. 1.
Here also the principal actors are Enki, his messenger
Isimu, and <q>Holy Innini</q> as in the better preserved epic. Both are poems on the
exaltation of Innini.</note>
A long mythological hymn in four columns<note place='foot'>Ni. 9205 published
by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Barton</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Miscellaneous Babylonian Inscriptions</hi>, No. 4. This text
is restored by a tablet of the late period
published by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Pinches</hi> in JRAS. 1919.</note>
on the cohabitation
of the earth god Enlil and the mother goddess Ninlil and an
equally long but more literary hymn to the virgin goddess
Innini<note place='foot'>Ni. 7847, published in this part, No. 3 and partially translated
on pages <ref target='Pg260'>260-264</ref>.</note> are good examples of this group of
tablets in the Nippur
collection.<note place='foot'>Undoubtedly Ni. 11327, a mythological hymn to Enki in
four columns, belongs to this class.
It is published as No. 14 of this part. A similar <hi rend='italic'>zagsal</hi> to Enki
belongs to the Constantinople
collection, see p. 45 of my <hi rend='italic'>Historical and Religious Texts</hi>.</note>
One of the most interesting examples of didactic
composition is a hymn to the deified king Dungi of Ur. By
accident both the Philadelphia and the Constantinople collections
possess copies of this remarkable poem and the entire
text has been reconstructed by the writer in a
previous publication.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Historical
and Religious Texts</hi>, pp. 14-18.</note>
1 have already signaled the unique importance of this
extraordinary hymn to the god-man Dungi in which he is
described as the divinely born king who was sent by the gods
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
to restore the lost paradise.<note place='foot'>See PSBA. 1919, 34.</note>
The poem mentions the flood
which, according to the Epic of Paradise, terminated by divine
punishment the Utopian age. The same mythological belief
underlies the hymn to Dungi. Paradise had been lost and this
god-man was sent to restore the golden age. There is a direct
connection between this messianic hymn to Dungi and the
remarkable Epic of Paradise. All other known hymns to deified
kings are liturgical compositions and have the rubrics which
characterize them as songs sung in public services. But the
didactic hymn to Dungi has the rubric
[<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Dungi</hi>]
<hi rend='italic'>zag-sal</hi>, <q>O
praise Dungi.</q> It would be difficult to claim more conclusive
evidence than this for the correctness of our interpretation of
the group of <hi rend='italic'>zagsal</hi> literature and of the entire mythological
and theological exegesis propounded in the edition of the Epic
of Paradise, edited in part one of this volume.<note place='foot'>One of the most
remarkable tablets in the Museum is Ni. 14005, a didactic poem in 61 lines
on the period of pre-culture and institution of Paradise by the earth god and the water
god in Dilmun. Published by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Barton</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Miscellaneous Babylonian Inscriptions</hi>, No. 8. The writer's
exegesis of this tablet will be found in <hi rend='italic'>Le Poème Sumérien du
Paradis</hi>, 135-146. It is not called a
<hi rend='italic'>zag-sal</hi> probably because the
writer considered the tablet too small to be dignified by that rubric.
Similar short mythological poems which really belong to the
<hi rend='italic'>zag-sal</hi> group are the following:
hymn to Shamash, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Radau</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Miscel.</hi> No. 4; hymn to Ninurta as creator of canals,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Radau</hi>, BE.
29, No. 2, translated in BL., 7-11; hymn to Nidaba,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Radau</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Miscel.</hi> No. 6.</note>
</p>

<p>
When our studies shall have reached the stage which renders
appropriate the collection of these texts into a special corpus
they will receive their due valuation in the history of religion.
That they are of prime importance is universally accepted.
</p>

<p>
From the point of view of the history of religion I would
assign the liturgical texts to the second group in order of importance.
Surprisingly few fragments from the long canonical
daily prayer services have been found. In fact, about all of the
perfected liturgies such as we know the Sumerian temples to
have possessed belong to the cults of deified kings. In the
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
entire religious literature of Nippur, not one approximately
complete canonical prayer service has survived. Only fragments
bear witness to their existence in the public song services
of the great temples in Nippur. A small tablet<note place='foot'>Ni.
112; see pp. 172-178.</note> published in
part two of this volume carries a few lines of the titular or
theological litany of a canonical or musically completed prayer
book as they finally emerged from the liturgical schools throughout
Sumer. Long liturgical services were evolved in the temples
at Nippur as we know from a few fragments of large five column
tablets.<note place='foot'>For example, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Myhrman</hi>, No. 3;
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Radau</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Miscel.</hi> No. 13; both canonical
prayer books of the weeping mother class. For a liturgy of the completed composite
type in the Tammuz cult, see <hi rend='smallcaps'>Radau</hi>, BE. 30, Nos. 1, 5,
6, 8, 9.</note> The completed composite liturgies or canonical
breviaries as they finally received form throughout Sumer in
the Isin period were made by selecting old songs of lament and
praise and re-editing them so as to develop theological ideas.
Characteristic of these final song services is the titular litany as
the penultimate song and a final song as an intercession. A
considerable number of such perfected services exist in the
Berlin collection. These were obtained apparently from Sippar.<note place='foot'>See
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sumerische Kultlieder</hi>,
p. V, note 2.</note>
The writer has made special efforts to reconstruct the Sumerian
canonical series as they existed in the age of Isin and the first
Babylonian dynasty. On the basis of tablets not excavated
at Nippur but belonging partly to the University Museum and
partly to the Berlin collection the writer restored the greater
part of an Enlil liturgy in part 2, pp. 155-167.<note place='foot'>The
base text here is <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, KL. No. 12.</note> In the present
and final part of this volume another Enlil liturgy has been
largely reconstructed on pages <ref target='Pg290'>290-306</ref>.<note place='foot'>The
base of this text is <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, KL. No. 11.</note> From these two
partially reconstructed song services the reader will obtain an
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
approximate idea of the elaborate liturgical worship of the
late Sumerian period. These were adopted by the Babylonians
and Assyrians as canonical and were employed in interlinear
editions by these Semitic peoples. Naturally the liturgical
remains of the Babylonian and Assyrian breviaries are much
more numerous and on the basis of these the writer was able in
previous volumes to identify and reconstruct a large number of
the Sumerian canonical musical services. But a large measure
of success has not yet attended his efforts to reconstruct the
original unilingual liturgies commonly written on one huge
tablet of ten columns. Obviously the priestly schools of the
great religious center at Nippur possessed these perfected prayer
books but their great size was fatal to their preservation. It
must be admitted that the Nippur collection has contributed
almost nothing from the great canonical Sumerian liturgies
which surely existed there.
</p>

<p>
Much better is the state of preservation of the precanonical
liturgies, or long song services constructed by simply joining a
series of <hi rend='italic'>kišubs</hi> or songs of prostration.
These <hi rend='italic'>kišub</hi> liturgies
are the basis of the more intricate canonical liturgies and in
this aspect the Nippur collection surpasses in value all others.
Canonical and perfected breviaries may be termed liturgical
compositions and the precanonical breviaries may be described
as liturgical compilations, if we employ <q>composition</q> and
<q>compilation</q> in their exact Latin sense. Since Sumerian
song services of the earlier type, that is liturgical compilations,
are more extensively represented in the Nippur temple library
than in any other, this is an appropriate place to give an exact
description of this form of prayer service which preceded and prepared
the way to the greatest system of musical ritual in any
ancient religion. If we may judge from the literary remains of
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
Nippur now in the University Museum, the priestly schools of
temple music in that famous city were extremely conservative
about abandoning the ancient liturgical compilations. These daily
song services, all of sorrowful sentiment and invariably emphasizing
humility and human suffering, are constructed by simply
compiling into one breviary a number of ancient songs, selected in
such manner that all are addressed to one deity. In this manner
arose intricate choral compilations of length suitable to a daily
prayer, each addressed to a great god. Hence we have in the
temple libraries throughout Sumer and Babylonia liturgies to each
of the great gods. Even in the less elaborate <hi rend='italic'>kišub</hi> compilations
there is in many cases revealed a tendency to recast and arrange
the collection of songs upon deeper principles. A tendency to
include in all services a song to the wrathful word of the gods
and a song to the sorrowful earth mother is seen even in the
Nippurian breviaries of the precanonical type. I need not dilate
here upon the great influence which these principles exercised
upon the beliefs and formal worship of Assyria and Babylonia,
upon the late Jewish Church and upon Christianity. The
personified word of god and the worship of the great
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>mater
dolorosa</foreign>, or the virgin goddess, are ancient Sumerian creations
whose influence has been effective in all lands.
</p>

<p>
As examples of the liturgical compilation texts the reader
is referred especially to the following tablets. On pages 290-292
the writer has described the important compiled liturgy found by
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Charles Virolleaud</hi>.<note place='foot'>Now in
the Nies Collection, Brooklyn, New York.</note> It is an excellent example of a Nippurian
musical prayer service. It contained eleven <hi rend='italic'>kišubs</hi>, or prayers,
and they are recast in such manner that the whole set forth one
idea which progresses to the end. The liturgy has in fact almost
reached the stage of a composition. And in these same pages
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
the reader will see how this service finally resulted in a canonical
liturgy, for the completed product has been recovered. On
pages <ref target='Pg309'>309-310</ref> will be found a fragment, part of an ancient
liturgy to Enlil of the compiled type. Here again we are able
to produce at least half of the great liturgy into which the old
service issued. In the preceding part of this volume, pages
184-187, is given the first song of a similar liturgy addressed to
the mother goddess.
</p>

<p>
Undoubtedly the most important liturgical tablet which
pertains to the ordinary cults in the Nippur collection is discussed
on pages <ref target='Pg279'>279-285</ref>. The breviary, which probably
belongs to the cult of the moon-god, derives importance from
its great length, its theological ideas, especially the mention of
the messengers which attend the Logos or Word of Enlil, and
its musical principles. Here each song has an antiphon which
is unusual in precanonical prayer books of the ordinary cults.<note place='foot'>A
similar liturgy is Ni. 19751, published by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Barton</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Miscellaneous Babylonian Inscriptions</hi>,
No. 6.</note>
Students of the history of liturgies will be also particularly
interested in the unique breviary compiled from eight songs of
prostration, a lamentation for the ancient city of Keš with theological
references. This song service was popular at Nippur, for
remains of at least two copies have been found in the collection.
A translation is given on pages <ref target='Pg311'>311-323</ref>.
</p>

<p>
The oldest public prayer services consisted of only one
psalm or song. A good number of these ancient psalms are
known from other collections, especially from those of the British
Museum. In view of the conservative attitude of the liturgists
at Nippur it is indeed surprising that so few of the old temple
songs have survived as they were originally employed; ancient
single song liturgies in this collection are rare. The following
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
list contains all the notable psalms of this kind. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Radau</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Miscellaneous Sumerian Texts</hi> No. 3<note place='foot'>Translated
by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Radau</hi> on pages 436-440.</note> is a lamentation of the
mother goddess and her appeal to Enlil on behalf of various
cities which had been visited by wars and other afflictions.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Radau</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>, No. 16 has the rubric
<hi rend='italic'>ki-šu<note place='foot'>Abbreviation for
<hi rend='italic'>ki-šub-gú-da</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>šêru</hi>, strophe,
song of prostration.</note> sìr-gal <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Enlil</hi>,
<q>A prayer
of prostration, a great song unto Enlil.</q> A psalm of the weeping
mother goddess similar in construction to <hi rend='smallcaps'>Radau</hi> No. 3 is edited
on pages <ref target='Pg260'>260-264</ref> of this volume.<note place='foot'>No. 3
of the texts in part 4.</note> No. 7 of this part, edited on
pages <ref target='Pg276'>276-279</ref>, is an excellent illustration of the methods
employed in developing the old single song psalms into compiled liturgies.
Here we have a short song service to the moon god constructed
by putting together two ancient psalms. The rubrics designate
them as <hi rend='italic'>sagar</hi>
melodies,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>sa-gar</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>pitnu šaknu</hi>, choral music, v. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>,
ZA. 31, 112. See also the writer's PBS.
Vol. XII, p. 12.</note> or choral songs, and adds that it is
sung to the lyre.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>nar-balag.</hi>
The liturgists classified the old songs according to the instrument employed in
the accompaniment. See SBP. p. ix.</note> An especially fine psalm of a liturgical
character was translated on pages 115-117. It is likewise a lament
to the sorrowful mother goddess.
</p>

<p>
The student of Sumero-Babylonian religion will not fail to
comment upon one remarkable lacuna in the religious literature
of every Sumerian city which has been excavated. Prayers of
the private cults are almost entirely nonexistent. Later Babylonian
religion is rich in penitential psalms written in Sumerian
for use in private devotions. These are known by the rubric
<hi rend='italic'>eršagģunga</hi>, or prayers to appease the heart. Only one has been
found in the Nippur collection,<note place='foot'>See page 118 in part 2.</note>
and none at all have been
recovered elsewhere. Seals of Sumerians showing them in
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
the act of saying their private prayers abound from the earliest
period. Most of these seals represent the worshipper saluting
a deity with a kiss thrown with the hand. The attitude was
described as <hi rend='italic'>šu-illa</hi>, or <q>Lifting of the Hand.</q> Semitic
prayers of the lifting of the hand abound in the religion of Babylonia
and Assyria. Here they are prayers employed in the incantation
ritual. We know from the great catalogue of Sumerian liturgical
literature compiled by the Assyrians that the Sumerians had a
large number of prayers of the lifting of the hand.<note place='foot'>See IV Raw. 53,
III 44-IV 28 restored from BL. 103 Reverse, a list of 47
<hi rend='italic'>šu-il-lá</hi> prayers to
various deities.</note> In Sumerian
religion these were apparently purely private prayers unconnected
with the rituals of atonement. At any rate the Nippur collections
in Constantinople and Philadelphia contain a large number
of incantation services for the atonement of sinners and the
afflicted. These resemble and are the originals of the Assyrian
incantation texts of the type <hi rend='italic'>utukku limnuti</hi>, and contain no
prayers either by priest (<hi rend='italic'>kišub</hi> in later terminology is the rubric
of priest's prayers in incantations) or by penitent (<hi rend='italic'>šu-il-la's</hi>).
The absence of prayers of private devotion in the temple library
of Nippur is absolutely inexplicable. Does it mean that the
Sumerians were so deficient in providing for the religious cure
of the individual? Their emphasis of the social solidarity of
religion is truly in remarkable contrast to the religious individualism
of the Semite. But the Sumerian historical inscriptions
often contain remarkable prayers of individuals. The seals emphasize
the act of private devotion. The catalogue of their
prayers states that they possessed a good literature for private
devotions. When one considers the evidence which induces to
assume that they possessed such a literature, its total absence
in every Sumerian collection is an enigma which the writer
fails to explain.
</p>

<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>

<p>
In the introduction to part two of this volume<note place='foot'>Pages
106-109.</note> the writer
has emphasized the peculiarly rich collection of tablets in this
collection pertaining to the cults of deified kings. In the present
part is published a most important tablet of that class. This
liturgy of the compiled type in six <hi rend='italic'>kišubs</hi> sung in the cult of the
god-man Ishme-Dagan, fourth king of the Isin dynasty, is
unique in the published literature of Sumer. Its musical intricacy
and theological importance have been duly defined on pages
<ref target='Pg245'>245-247</ref>. With the publication of these texts the important
song services of the cults of deified kings are exhausted. In
addition to the texts of this class translated or noted in part
two, I call attention to the very long text concerning Dungi,
king of Ur, published by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Barton</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Miscellaneous Babylonian
Inscriptions</hi> No. 3. In that extremely long poem in six columns
of about 360 lines<note place='foot'>Less than half the tablet is
preserved.</note> there are no rubrics, which shows at once
that it is not a cult song service. Moreover, Dungi had not
been deified when the poem was written. It is really an historical
poem to this king whose deification had at any rate not yet
been recognized at Nippur. It belongs in reality to the same
class of literature as the historical poem on his father Ur-Engur,
translated on pages 126-136.
</p>

<p>
The only Sumerian cult songs to deified kings not in the
Nippur collection have now been translated by the writer and
made accessible for wider study. One hymn to Ur-Engur
which proves that he had been canonized at his capitol in Ur
will be found in the <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Society of Biblical
Literature</hi>, 1918, 45-50. The twelfth song of a liturgy to Ishme-Dagan
published by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi> from the Berlin collection is translated
on pages 52-56 of the same article. Finally a long liturgy to
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
Libit-Ishtar, son of Ishme-Dagan, likewise in Berlin, has been
translated there on pages 69-79.<note place='foot'>Note that this breviary of
the cult of Libit-Ishtar terminates with two ancient songs, one
to Innini and one to Ninâ, both types of the mother goddess
who was always intimately connected
with the god-men as their divine mother.</note> Since the Berlin texts
probably came from Sippar their existence in that cult is
important. For they prove not only the practice of cult worship
of deified kings in that city, but the domination of Isin
over this north Semitic city is thus documented for a period as
late as Libit-Ishtar.
</p>

<p>
Nearly all the existing prayer services in the cults of the
deified kings of Ur and Isin are now published and translated.
The student will observe that they are all of the compiled type
but that there is in most cases much musical arrangement and
striving for combined effect. A few, and especially the Ishme-Dagan
liturgy published as No. 1 of this part, reveal theological
speculation and an effort to give the institution of god-man
worship its proper place in their religion. The hymns of
these cults comparatively so richly represented in this volume
will be among the most interesting groups of religious texts
supplied by the excavations at Nippur.<note place='foot'>For a list of
the abbreviations employed in this volume, see page 98 of Part I.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Oxford</hi>, July 9, 1919.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lamentation of Ishme-Dagan Over Nippur. 13856 (No. 1)</head>

<p>
The liturgical character of this tablet is unique among all
the numerous choral compositions of the Isin period. It is a large
two column tablet containing six long <hi rend='italic'>kišub</hi> melodies. Liturgies
of such kind, compiled by joining a series of <hi rend='italic'>kišubs</hi>, or melodies,
attended by prostrations, represent an advanced stage in the
evolution of these compositions in that the sections are not
mechanically joined together by selecting older melodies without
much regard for their connection, but as a whole they are apparently
original compositions so arranged that they develop a motif
from the beginning to the end of the liturgy. Choral services
composed of <hi rend='italic'>kišubs</hi> in the cults of deified kings have been
found<note place='foot'>The twelfth <hi rend='italic'>kišub</hi> of a liturgy to
Ishme-Dagan is published in <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern's</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Kultlieder</hi>, No. 200.
A somewhat similar song service of the cult of this king has been
published in the writer's <hi rend='italic'>Sumerian
Liturgical Texts</hi>, 178-187. A portion of a series to Dungi was published
by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Radau</hi> in the <hi rend='italic'>Hilprecht
Anniversary Volume</hi>, No. 1. The liturgy to Libit-Ishtar in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, K L. 199 I&mdash;Rev. I 7, is
composed of a series of <hi rend='italic'>sa-(bar)-gid-da</hi>.</note>
wherein the deeds and personality of the king are sung, his divine
claims are emphasized and his Messianic promises rehearsed. But
the liturgy here published resembles in literary style the classical
lamentations which always formed the chief temple services of
Sumer and Babylonia. It more especially resembles the weeping
mother liturgies, but here Ishme-Dagan appears in the lines of
the service in a rôle similar to that of the sorrowful mother
goddess of the ordinary liturgies, as he weeps for Nippur.
</p>

<p>
<q>Her population like cattle of the fields within her have
perished. Helas my land I sigh.</q>
</p>

<p>
So reads a line from the second melody.
</p>

<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>

<p>
Lines of similar character occur repeatedly in the laments
of the mother goddess as she weeps for her people in the standard
liturgies. In other words, the cult of the deified kings issues here
into its logical result. The god man created to live and die for
his people usurps the sphere of the earth mother herself. And
like her he is intimately associated with the fortunes of mankind,
of nature and all living creatures. The great gods and the hosts
of their attendants rule over man and the various phases of the
universe from afar. But the mother goddess is the incarnation
of fruitful nature, the mother of man whose joys and sorrows she
feels. So also in this remarkable liturgy the deified son of the
great gods lives among men, becomes their patron and divine
companion.
</p>

<p>
The tablet contained originally about fifty lines in each
column, or 200 in all. About one-third of the first column is
gone. The first melody contained at least fifty lines and ended
somewhere shortly after the first line of Col. II of the obverse.
It began by relating how Enlil had ordered the glory of Nippur,
and then had become angered against his city, sending upon it
desolation at the hands of an invader. When we take up the
first lines of Obv. II we are well into the second melody which
represents Ishme-Dagan mourning for fathers and mothers who
had been separated from their children; for brothers who had
been scattered afar; for the cruel reign of the savage conqueror
who now rules where the dark-headed people had formerly
dwelled in peace.
</p>

<p>
At about the middle of Obv. II begins the third melody
which consists of 38 lines extending to Rev. I 19. In this section
the psalmist ponders upon the injustice of his city's fate, and
looks for the time when her woes will cease, and Enlil will be
reconciled.
</p>

<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>

<p>
The fourth section begins at line 24 of Rev. I and ended
near the bottom of this column which is now broken away.
Here Ishme-Dagan joins with the psalmists weeping for Nippur.
</p>

<p>
Section 5 began near the end of Rev. I, and ends at line 16
of Rev. II. Here begins the phase of intercession to Enlil to
repent and revenge Nippur upon the foe. Section 6, beginning
at Rev. II 17, probably continued to the end of the column and
the tablet. Here the liturgy promises the end of Nippur's sorrow.
Enlil has ordered the restoration of his city and has sent Ishme-Dagan,
his beloved shepherd, to bring joy unto the people.
</p>

<p>
After sections 2 and 3 follows the antiphon of one or two
lines. The ends of sections 1 and 4 are lost but we may
suppose that antiphons stood here also. Section 5 does not have
an antiphon. Since section 6 ended the liturgy it is not likely
that an antiphon stood there.
</p>

<p>
[Transcriber's Note: In the original book, throughout the book,
all of the transcriptions and
translations were done in two columns. The left column showed the transcription,
and the right the English translation; each line had the line number.
In this e-book, the transcription and translation of each line will be shown
in succeeding lines.]
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Obverse. Col. I</hi>
</p>

<p>
(About eighteen lines broken away.)
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. ... <hi rend='italic'>túg ba-ra-pad-da</hi></l>
<l>1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>A-nun-na-ge-ne
na-ba-an-ri-gi-eš-ám</hi></l>
<l>2. The Anunnaki he caused to take their
seats.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>na-ba-</hi> is for
<hi rend='italic'>nam-ba</hi>, emphatic prefix. See PBS. X pt. 1 p. 76 n. 4.
Cf. <hi rend='italic'>na-ri-bi</hi>, verily she
utters for thee, BE. 30, No. 2, 20.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>ub-šu-ukkin-na<note place='foot'>On the philological meaning of
this name, see VAB. IV 126, 55.</note> ki di-gal tar-ru</hi></l>
<l>3. In the Assembly Hall, place where the great judgments are decided,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>eš-bar-e si-di ba-ra-an-zu-uš<note place='foot'>For the suffixes
<hi rend='italic'>eš</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>uš</hi>, denoting plural of the object,
see <hi rend='italic'>Sum. Gr.</hi> p. 168.</note>-ám</hi></l>
<l>4. Decisions to arrange he caused them to know.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>dingir-bi-ne ki-dúr ba-ab- gar-ra</hi><note place='foot'>On
<hi rend='italic'>ki-dúr-gar</hi> cf. Gudea, Cyl. B 12, 19.</note></l>
<l>5. These gods he caused to take up there their abode.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>šug-láģ-bi im-šub-ba aga-bi im-ri-a</hi></l>
<l>6. Their clean sacrificial food he gave, their crowns he clothed upon them.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>ki-lugal du-azag<note place='foot'>Usually written
<hi rend='italic'>dù-azag</hi>, throne room. On the meaning of
<hi rend='italic'>du</hi> in this word, see AJSL.
33, 107. Written also <hi rend='italic'>dû-azag</hi>, in Ni. 11005
II 9.</note> ḳin-sîg<note place='foot'>Cf. Gudea, Cyl. A 25, 14, the
<hi rend='italic'>kin-gi</hi> of the <hi rend='italic'>unu-gal</hi>.</note>
unù<note place='foot'>Br. 7720. The sign <hi rend='italic'>TE</hi> is here
<hi rend='italic'>gunufied</hi>. Cf. OBI. 127, Obv. 5.</note>-gal-ba</hi></l>
<l>7. In the king's place, the throne room, the <hi rend='italic'>ḳinsig</hi> of the
vast abode,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>tin<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Tin</hi> alone may mean
<q>wine,</q> as in Gudea, Cyl. B, 5, 21; 6, 1. See also
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Nikolski</hi>, No.
264, <hi rend='italic'>duk-tin</hi>, a jar of wine.</note> làl bal-bal-e mu-šú
be-ib-tar-ra</hi></l>
<l>8. The libation of wine and honey yearly he decreed.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>Nibru-(ki) uru giš-gig-dagal-la-bi-šú</hi></l>
<l>9. For Nippur the city whose shadow extends afar</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>uku-sag-gig-ga ní-im-ši-ib-te-en-na</hi></l>
<l>10. The people, the dark headed, he caused to have reverence.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>ki-dúr-ba gú-ni
a-gim<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>a-gim</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>dimêtu</hi>,
ban, SBH. 59, 25. <hi rend='italic'>a-gim ģe-im-bal-e</hi>,
The ban may he elude, Ni. 11065 Rev. II 25. Unpublished. The line is not entirely clear;
cf. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Brünnow</hi>, No. 3275.</note> ba-ra-an-šub</hi></l>
<l>11. But its habitations he cursed ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>ab sīg-gan-dúg-ga-gim e-ne sīg-gan-ba-ra-an-dúg</hi></l>
<l>12. Like scattered cows he scattered them.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>uru šag-bi er-gíg sȋg- bi</hi></l>
<l>13. The city's interior is filled with weeping,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>en-na<note place='foot'>For <hi rend='italic'>en-na</hi> in the
sense of <q>while,</q> see <hi rend='smallcaps'>Pery</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sin</hi>
in LSS. page 41, 16.</note> dam<note place='foot'>The sign is imperfectly made on
the tablet.</note> dingir ga-ša-an-bi li-bi nu-tar-ri</hi><note place='foot'>Cf. SBP.
328, 11.</note></l>
<l>14. While the consort, its divine queen, is not solicitous for her.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>é-gu-la za-pa-ag ib-zu-a-bi</hi></l>
<l>15. The great house which knew the cry of multitudes,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>é-ri-a-súd-gim galu nu-un-tur-tur</hi></l>
<l>16. Like a vast building in ruins men enter not.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>Nibru-(ki) uru ki ligir-ligir-gal-gal-e-ne
šu-im-ma-an-ḪA<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>ḪA</hi> is probably identical in
usage with <hi rend='italic'>PEŠ</hi>, and the idea common to both is <q>be many,
extensive, abundant.</q> Note <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Kultlieder</hi> 19 Rev. has <hi rend='italic'>ḪA</hi> where SBP. 12,
2 has <hi rend='italic'>PEŠ</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>šu-peš</hi> occurs in Gudea, Cyl. A 16, 23; 11, 9; 19, 9 and
CT. 15, 7, 27.</note>-eš-ám</hi></l>
<l>17. In Nippur, the city where great princes were prosperous,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>a-na-áš ú-gu i-ni-in-de-eš</hi><note place='foot'>On
<hi rend='italic'>ugu-de</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>ḇalāku, na'butu</hi>, to run away, see
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Delitzsch</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Glossar</hi> p. 43. Also
<hi rend='italic'>ugu-bi-an-de-e</hi>,
V R. 25<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> 17; <hi rend='italic'>ù-gù-dé</hi>, RA. 10, 78, 14;
<hi rend='italic'>ú-gu ba-an-dé</hi>, if he run away, VS. 13, 72 9
and 84, 11,
with variant 73, 11 <hi rend='italic'>u-da-pa-ar</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>udtappar</hi>,
if he take himself away. <hi rend='italic'>ú-gu-ba-an-de-zu</hi>, when thou
fleest, BE. 31, 28, 23. <hi rend='italic'>ú-gu-ba-de</hi>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Genouillac</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Inventaire</hi> 944;
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Clay</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Miscellen</hi> 28 V 71:
<hi rend='italic'>má ú-gu-ba-an-de</hi>, <q>If a boat float away,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>IV</hi> 14. See also
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Grant</hi> AJSL. 33, 200-2.</note></l>
<l>18. Why have they fled?</l>
</lg>

<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>uku sag-gig gú-sa-ģi-a<note place='foot'>Sic!
<hi rend='italic'>gú-sa-bi</hi> is expected; cf. RA. 11, 145, 31
<hi rend='italic'>gú-sa-bi</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>napḫar-šu-nu</hi>.</note>
udu-gim be-ib-?<note place='foot'>Sign obliterated; the traces resemble <hi rend='italic'>SU</hi>.</note>-a</hi></l>
<l>19. The people, the dark headed, all of them like sheep....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. <hi rend='italic'>e(?)-en-šú KAK-RU<note place='foot'>Read perhaps
<hi rend='italic'>dū-šub</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>nadû ša rigmi</hi>, to shout loudly.
Cf. <hi rend='italic'>dúg sir-ra šub-ba-a-zu</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>rigme
zarbiš addiki</hi>, ASKT. 122, 12. Passim in astrological texts.</note>
er a-nir šag PA-ḪI-BAD-a</hi></l>
<l>20. How long shall loud crying(?), weeping and wailing
<hi rend='italic'>distress</hi> (?) the heart?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>en-šú bar<note place='foot'>The tablet has
<hi rend='italic'>MAŠ</hi>. The Semitic would be
<hi rend='italic'>adi mati kabattu iparrad</hi>.</note> be-íb- ... ùl</hi></l>
<l>21. How long shall the soul be terrified?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>šag nu-ub-ši-túg-e</hi></l>
<l>22. And the heart repose not?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>su</hi>ùb
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>su</hi>á-lá
mu-un-tuk-a-ri</hi><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>ri</hi> is apparently an emphatic
element identical in meaning with <hi rend='italic'>ám</hi>; cf. SBP. 10, 7-12.
Note <hi rend='italic'>ri</hi>, variant of <hi rend='italic'>nam</hi>, SBH. 95,
23 = <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, KL. 12 I 8.</note></l>
<l>23. To the drum and cymbals I sing.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. ... <hi rend='italic'>gíg-ga a-a na</hi>....</l>
<l>24. ... sorrowfully(?)....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. ... <hi rend='italic'>síg ... ne ba-dúr-ru-ne-eš</hi></l>
<l>25. ... <hi rend='italic'>brick</hi> ... they dwell.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. ... <hi rend='italic'>gar-ra-bi er-šú ba-ab-bi-ne</hi></l>
<l>26. ... in tears they speak.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. ... <hi rend='italic'>šub-ba tūr-ru-ba-ne</hi></l>
<l>27. ... are made small.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28. ... <hi rend='italic'>sìr-ri-eš ba-ab-bi-ne</hi></l>
<l>28. ... in misery they speak.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29. ... <hi rend='italic'>ki-dúr-bi ḳar-ra</hi></l>
<l>29. ... whose habitations are desolated.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>30. ... <hi rend='italic'>im-ši-sìr-sìr-e-ne-eš</hi><note place='foot'>Sic! Double
plural. <hi rend='italic'>eš</hi> probably denotes the past tense, see
<hi rend='italic'>Sum. Gr.</hi> § 224.</note></l>
<l>30. Unto ... they have hastened.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31. ... <hi rend='italic'>ne-ne-túg</hi></l>
<l>31. ...?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32. ... <hi rend='italic'>ga(?)nu-zu-gim</hi></l>
<l>32. ... like one that knows not.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33. ... <hi rend='italic'>sūģ</hi><note place='foot'>Sign
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Brünnow</hi>, No. 11208.</note></l>
<l>33. ... is in confusion.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<hi rend='smallcaps'>End of Col. I.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Col. II</hi>
</p>

<p>
(About fifteen lines broken away.)<note place='foot'>The first melody or liturgical
section probably ended somewhere in this lost passage at the
top of Col. II.</note>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. ... <hi rend='italic'>gál</hi></l>
<l>1. ....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. ... <hi rend='italic'>-e ba-ab-dúg-ám</hi><note place='foot'>Text
<hi rend='italic'>A-ÁŠ</hi>!</note></l>
<l>2. ....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. ... <hi rend='italic'>ma-lal im-mé</hi></l>
<l>3. ....</l>
</lg>

<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>

<lg>
<l>4. ... <hi rend='italic'>ģul-nu-zu-ne nig-dug be-ib-tar-ru-uš-ám</hi></l>
<l>4. ... evil they know not, good they have decreed.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>i-lu-gíg im-me</hi></l>
<l>5. Bitter lament I<note place='foot'>The subject is Ishme-Dagan.</note> utter.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>nam-lù-găl-bi máš-anšu-gim šag-ba mi-ni-ib-tíl-la-aš</hi></l>
<l>6. Her population like cattle of the fields within her have perished.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>a ka-na-ăm-mu im-me</hi></l>
<l>7. Helas! my Land! I sigh.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>ki-el kalag tul-tul-lá-bi-ne sùr<note place='foot'>The sign is
a clearly made <hi rend='smallcaps'>Br.</hi> No. 10275 but probably an error for 10234.
For <hi rend='italic'>sùr-ri-eš</hi>
see BA. V 633, 22; SBH. 56 Rev. 27; <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, KL. 12
Rev. 17.</note>-ri- -eš mi-ni-ib- sal-la-áš</hi></l>
<l>8. Maid and young man and their children cruelly have been scattered far and wide.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>iš-a-bi im-me</hi></l>
<l>9. Tearfully I sigh.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>šeš-bi imi-dugud šèg-gà-gim
di-e-be-ib-sud-ám</hi><note place='foot'>This compound verb
<hi rend='italic'>di-e-sud</hi> here for the first time. <hi rend='italic'>di-e</hi>
is probably connected with <hi rend='italic'>de</hi>
to flee. At the end <hi rend='italic'>AŠ</hi> is written for <hi rend='italic'>AN</hi>.
Read <hi rend='italic'>a-áš</hi> and construe <hi rend='italic'>šeš</hi> as a
plural?</note></l>
<l>10. Their brothers like a rain storm have fled afar.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>er-šú nu- gul-<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>gul</hi>
= <hi rend='italic'>kalû</hi>, restrain, is ordinarily construed with the infinitive
alone; <hi rend='italic'>še-du nu-uš-gul-e-en</hi>
= <hi rend='italic'>damāma ul ikalla</hi>, Lang. B.L. 80, 25; SBH. 133, 65; 66, 15,
etc.</note> e</hi></l>
<l>11. I cease not to weep.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>é-e áb amar-bi kud-du gim
ní-bi-šù ūr-gíg-ga<note place='foot'>Confirms SAI. 6507 = <hi rend='italic'>uḳḳu</hi>,
dumb, grief stricken.</note> im-gub</hi></l>
<l>12. The household like a cow, whose calf has been separated
from her, stand by themselves with sorrowful souls.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>sîg-sîg<note place='foot'>Variant of
<hi rend='italic'>sīg-sīg</hi>, etc. See <hi rend='italic'>Sum. Gr.</hi> p. 237
<hi rend='italic'>sig.</hi> 3. Also <hi rend='smallcaps'>Poebel</hi>, PBS. V 26,
29.</note> ni- mal- mal</hi></l>
<l>13. They have lapsed into the misery of silence.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>balag-di<note place='foot'>On the liturgical use
of <hi rend='italic'>balag-di</hi>, see BL. p. XXXVII.</note>
lù-ad-dug-ga-ge<note place='foot'>Var. of <hi rend='italic'>ad-du-ge</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>bêl nissāti</hi>, IV R. 11<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> 23:
<hi rend='italic'>ad-da-ge</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zim.</hi> K.L. 12 II 3.
See for discussion, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Lang.</hi> PBS. X 137 n.
7.</note>-ne um-me-da-ū-a-di-gim</hi></l>
<l>14. Oh sing to the lyre! The wailers like a child nursing mother who cries in woe</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>mu-bi er-ra mi-ni-ib-bal-bal-e-ne</hi></l>
<l>15. because of them devised lamentation.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>uru ù-mu-un-bi sag-ib-ta-an-dīm-ma</hi></l>
<l>16. The city whose lord had been magnified,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>igi-ni sá kûr-ra ib-ta-an-gar-ra ad-e-eš ba-an-ara-áš</hi></l>
<l>17. In whose presence a hostile rule has been established, with sighing
they have caused to walk.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>é-zid kur-kur-ra igi-šú ba-an-gín-na</hi></l>
<l>18. As for the faithful temple, which in the lands excelled all,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>uku sag-gig-gi uš-zi<note place='foot'>A new ideogram. Perhaps
<hi rend='italic'>uššu kînu</hi>, <q>sure foundation.</q></note> be-íb-tùb-ba</hi></l>
<l>19. (Where) the people, the dark headed, reposed
<hi rend='italic'>in security</hi>;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. <hi rend='italic'>a-na ib-ag a-na im-ģa-lam-ma-bi</hi><note place='foot'>For
suffixed <hi rend='italic'>ni</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>bi</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>ba</hi> in interrogative sentences note also
<hi rend='italic'>a-na an-na-ab-duģ-ni</hi>, What can
I add to thee? <hi rend='smallcaps'>Genouillac</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Drehem</hi>, No.
1, 12, <hi rend='italic'>a-ba ku-ul-la-ba</hi>, Who shall restrain? Ni.
4610 Rev. 1.</note></l>
<l>20. What has done it, what has destroyed it?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un-bi ib-ta-kàš sag-ki-a mu-un-du</hi></l>
<l>21. Its lord is a fugitive, he <hi rend='italic'>hastens in flight</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>ki-šub<note place='foot'>See BL. p. XLV, and PBS. X 151
note 1.</note>- gú- 2 kam</hi></l>
<l>22. A melody with prostrations. Second section.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'>me-gal šag-bi<note place='foot'>On the anticipative construct,
see § 138 of the grammar.</note>
ba-ra-an-è-a-áš gù-gíg-ga nu-mal<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>nu-mal</hi> are
uncertain. The tablet is worn at this point.</note>-aš</hi></l>
<l>23. The meaning of the great decrees they have glorified. Sorrowful words
they restrain not.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>giš-gí-gál-bi-im</hi><note place='foot'>On the use of this
term, see PBS. X 151 n. 1 and 182, 33.</note></l>
<l>24. This is its antiphon.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>uru ù-mu-un-bi šag ba-da-an-dib-ba</hi></l>
<l>25. The city whose lord is distressed,<note place='foot'>Cf. BL. 110, 11.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. <hi rend='italic'>en-šú la-ba-ši-gur-ru suģ<note place='foot'>Written Br. 3046,
but the usual form is the <hi rend='italic'>gunu</hi>, Br. 3009.
<hi rend='italic'>suģ-ám-bi</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>aḫulap-šu</hi>.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Poebel</hi>, PBS. V 152 IX 8: cf. also lines 9 and 10
<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> In later texts <hi rend='italic'>suģ-a</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>aḫulap</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Haupt</hi>,
ASKT. 122, 12. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Delitzsch</hi>, H. W. 44<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>aḫulap</hi> has the derived meaning of mercy, the answer
to the <q>How long</q> refrain as in this passage. See also SBP. 241 note 27 and
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Schrank</hi>, LSS.
III 1, 53.</note>-ám-bi nu- um- im me</hi></l>
<l>26. Until when shall it not return (to its rest)? Until when shall its <q>How long</q>
not be spoken?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. <hi rend='italic'>síg-bi a-na-šú gĭr-ib-ta-an-gar</hi></l>
<l>27. Why are its brick walls trodden underfoot?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28. <hi rend='italic'>tu(ģu) za-pa-ág mà-mà-bi ab-ta ib-ta- an-dal</hi></l>
<l>28. The doves screaming flew from their nests.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29. <hi rend='italic'>é ? zu síg nar-balag ág-zí-ba</hi><note place='foot'>Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>nar-balag nig-dug-ga</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Poebel</hi>,
PBS. V 25 IV 48. Our text has the <hi rend='italic'>emesal</hi> form
<hi rend='italic'>ag-zib</hi>.</note></l>
<l>29. The temple ... the sweet voiced flute,</l>
</lg>

<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>

<lg>
<l>30. ... <hi rend='italic'>be-in-gí</hi></l>
<l>30.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31. Entirely destroyed.</l>
<l>31.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32. <hi rend='italic'>é dû- na</hi><note place='foot'>For
<hi rend='italic'>dû-na</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>šalṭiš</hi>, see RA. 11,
146, 33.</note></l>
<l>32. The temple violently....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33. <hi rend='italic'>é ní-nu-tuk-gim si-ga</hi>....</l>
<l>33. The temple like one without reverence....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>34. <hi rend='italic'>ág-me-bi nu-azag-azag-ga</hi></l>
<l>34. Its regulations unholy ones....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>35. <hi rend='italic'>šu-luģ-bi kur-kur-ra
nu-ub-da-suģ<note place='foot'>Written Br. 3046 =
<hi rend='italic'>nasāḳu</hi>.</note>-a-gim</hi></l>
<l>35. Its cult of ablutions like those which had not been chosen above those
of all lands</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>36. <hi rend='italic'>šu-be-in-ḳal tuģ-ni ib-ta-an-zig</hi></l>
<l>36. He has demolished, its wealth he seized away.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>37. <hi rend='italic'>ág-gíg-ūr-ra a a-še-ra mu-un-di</hi></l>
<l>37. In misery of soul how long shall I utter lament?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>38. <hi rend='italic'>ta-še<note place='foot'>For <hi rend='italic'>ta-šú</hi>.
Cf. BA. V 679, 14.</note> egir na-ăm-ga-lim<note place='foot'>Probably a variant of
<hi rend='italic'>namģalam</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>namģilim</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>šaḫluḳtu.</hi></note> dū-a la-ba-an-kalag</hi></l>
<l>38. Why after the destruction has been done is it not respected?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>39. <hi rend='italic'>ág-el-dū-a-gim ģur-ri<note place='foot'>The demonstrative
pronoun <hi rend='italic'>ģur</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>ūr</hi></note> zag-be-in-bi</hi></l>
<l>39. As one who accomplishes pure things this one has uttered a curse:&mdash;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>40. <hi rend='italic'>síg-bi pā-e a-na-aš ib-ta-an-è</hi></l>
<l>40. <q>Why rise her brick-walls in effulgent glory?</q></l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reverse, Col. I</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>gig-an-bil<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>mûši ù urra</hi>,
IV R. 5<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> 65; CT. 16, 20, 68.</note>-ba
šag-ba er be-in-[zí-em]</hi></l>
<l>1. Night and day within her wailing is made.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>á-še kúr ág-gíg be-ib-aga-a</hi></l>
<l>2. Now the stranger has wrought insult.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un-bi im-ģul-ám šu-bi
be-in-gí-ám</hi><note place='foot'>Text <hi rend='italic'>A-AŠ</hi>.</note></l>
<l>3. Its lord like a storm wind <hi rend='italic'>their hands have removed</hi>(?)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>uru-bi é-bi in-gul-gul-ám</hi></l>
<l>4. Their city, their temple, he has destroyed.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>ùr-bi in-sir-ra-ám šitim<note place='foot'>Sign
<hi rend='italic'>AL</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>šitim</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>šidim</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>idinnu</hi> is usually written with the sign
<hi rend='italic'>GIM</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Poebel</hi>, PBS. V
117, 14 f. <hi rend='italic'>amelu ĢIM</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>idinnu</hi>, passim
in Neo-Babylonian contracts.</note>-e-ne in-ra-ám</hi></l>
<l>5. Its foundation he laid waste, the skilled workmen he transported.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>dam dumu-bi šag-ba mi-ni-in-dìg-ga-ám</hi></l>
<l>6. Wife and children within her he slew.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>uru-bi uru-šub-ba im-ma-ni-in-tu-ra-ám</hi></l>
<l>7. Their city a subjected city he caused to become.<note place='foot'>Literally,
<q>caused to enter.</q></note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>mu-un-ga-bi ní-e
be-in-ne-ra-ám</hi><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>munga</hi> with
<hi rend='italic'>ra</hi>, to carry away property as booty, see SBH. No. 32 Rev. 21 and
BL. No. 51. The comparison with line 11 suggests, however, another interpretation,
<hi rend='italic'>immer-e be-in-ne-ra-ám</hi>,
<q>the storm-wind carried away.</q></note></l>
<l>8. Its property he himself took as plunder.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>uru-gál-la-bi nu-gál-la
mi-ni-in-tu-ra-ám</hi><note place='foot'>In lines 7 and 9 the verb
<hi rend='italic'>tur</hi> is employed in the sense of <q>to cause an event to enter,</q>
to bring about the entrance of a condition or state of affairs.</note></l>
<l>9. Their city which was he has caused to become a city which is not.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>dim-ma-bi gĭr ib-ta-an-kúr-ra-ám</hi></l>
<l>10. Its works of art he placed a hostile foot upon.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>túg-bi in-sūģ<note place='foot'>Br. 11208.</note>-ám
lil-e be-in-sīg-ám</hi></l>
<l>11. Its garments<note place='foot'>The passage refers to the priests' robes
and garments of the temple service. See also
SBP. 4, 9.</note> he seized away, the winds tore them in shreds.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>ú-kaš-a-bi ib-ta-an-kar-ra-ám</hi></l>
<l>12. Its food and drink he pilfered.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>ga-zu-bi ... mi-ni-ib-tíl-la-ám</hi></l>
<l>13. Their infants(?) ... he caused to perish.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>é-e kúr ág-rig<note place='foot'>Variant of
<hi rend='italic'>nam-rig-aga</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>šalālu</hi>.</note> ...
be-ib-aga-a</hi></l>
<l>14. The temple a stranger plundered.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>a-še-ir-gíg im-me er be-ib-lu-lu</hi></l>
<l>15. Bitter sighing I utter, tears I pour out.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>balag-di galu i-lu ba-ab-bi-ám</hi></l>
<l>16. Oh sing to the lyre, he that speaks the songs of wailing.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>šag nu-zí-ba-bi mu-un-na-ni-ib-gí-gí</hi></l>
<l>17. Their hearts which are not glad it will pacify.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un-bi me-bi ba-ra-an-è-a-áš</hi><note place='foot'>See
Obv. II 23.</note></l>
<l>18. The decrees of their lord they have glorified.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>á-bi nu-mu-un-tag-ga-ám li-bi nu-tar-ra-ám</hi></l>
<l>19. He<note place='foot'>Enlil.</note> concerns himself not with their
oracles; he cares not for their future.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>

<lg>
<l>20. ... <hi rend='italic'>ki-šub-gú 3-kam-ma-ám</hi></l>
<l>20. A melody with prostrations. Third section.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>me-gal-gal-la-ni a-gim ba-ra-an-ēš</hi></l>
<l>21. His great decrees thus he has ordered.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>á-bi la-ba-an-tag-ga-ám li-bi nu-tar-ra-ám</hi></l>
<l>22. He has concerned himself not with their oracles; he cared not for their future.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. ... <hi rend='italic'>giš-gí-gál-bi-im</hi></l>
<l>23. This is its antiphon.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>mu-lu sìr-ra<note place='foot'>Rendered
<hi rend='italic'>ša ṣirḫi</hi>, BL. 95, 19. On this title for a psalmist, see BL.
XXIV.</note> na-ăm-tar-gíg-ga-mu-uš</hi><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>uš</hi>
has evidently some meaning similar to the one given in the translation but it has not yet
been found in this sense in any other passage. We have here the variant of
<hi rend='italic'>iš</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>eš</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>bakû</hi> with
vowel <hi rend='italic'>u</hi>. See <hi rend='italic'>Sum. Gr.</hi> 213 and
222.</note></l>
<l>24. He of melodious song the sorrowful fate weeps for.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>me ib-ši-en<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>DUL-DU</hi>.
The sign <hi rend='italic'>DUL</hi> is erroneously written REC. 236. In the text
change <hi rend='italic'>si</hi> to
<hi rend='italic'>ši</hi>.</note>-ne-en er im-ši-šeš-šéš-en</hi></l>
<l>25. Sound of mourning he causes to arise; lamentation he utters.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. <hi rend='italic'>á-še balag-di sìr-zu- ne</hi></l>
<l>26. Now oh sing to the lyre! They that know the melodies</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. <hi rend='italic'>ḪAR-dúr-ra-mu ma-ar ba-bi-ne-ám</hi></l>
<l>27. My ... shall speak for me.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28. <hi rend='italic'>ì-dé-šú kuš-a im-ma-sȋg<note place='foot'>Br.
3739.</note>-ga-mu</hi></l>
<l>28. Now I am filled with sighing.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29. <hi rend='italic'>galu<note place='foot'>Here treated as plural.</note>-bi
er-ra ma-an-mà-mà-ne-àm</hi></l>
<l>29. Her population offer prayers to me.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>30. <hi rend='italic'>á-še šag-zu<note place='foot'>The tablet has
<hi rend='italic'>SU</hi>. For <hi rend='italic'>šag-zu</hi> synonym of
<hi rend='italic'>teṣlitu</hi>, see IV R. 21b Rev. 5.</note>-mu né-táb-táb-ba-mu</hi></l>
<l>30. Now my intercession, my pleading(?),</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31. <hi rend='italic'>á-še dúr-ra-bi ma-ar galu mu-da-an-zu-ám</hi></l>
<l>31. Now mightily the population unite with me in making known.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32. <hi rend='italic'>a-rá gig-ga šag-sir-ra-mu</hi></l>
<l>32. Upon ways of pain my mercy<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>libbu rûḳu</hi>;
see <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, KL. No. 8 I 3 and IV 28.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33. <hi rend='italic'>ū-a tūr-ra-mu er-ra ma-an-tuk-ám</hi></l>
<l>33. Oh woe! my children weep for.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>34. <hi rend='italic'>éš é-dū-a ki-dúr-a-ne-ne</hi></l>
<l>34. In the house, the well builded temple, in their dwelling,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>35. <hi rend='italic'>nar-e-eš ba-ab-gar-ra ní-tuk ba-ab-tur-ra-ám</hi></l>
<l>35. Sound like one chanting is raised and praise is diminished.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>

<lg>
<l>36. <hi rend='italic'>galu erím-eka na-ăm-mu ib-tíl-la</hi></l>
<l>36. The foe has caused my land to perish.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>37. <hi rend='italic'>er-ra ma-pad<note place='foot'>The sign like many others on
this tablet is imperfectly made. <hi rend='italic'>ma-pad</hi>? or
<hi rend='italic'>ma-šig</hi>? The
meaning is obscure.</note>(?)ma-an-mà-mà-ne-ám</hi></l>
<l>37. They beseech....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>38. <hi rend='italic'>šag ág-gíg-ga ib-sȋg-mu ad-bi-šú PI-gà<note place='foot'>Text
uncertain. Perhaps <hi rend='italic'>PI-SI-gà-bi</hi>.</note>-bi
dé-ib-šed-dé-ne-ám</hi></l>
<l>38. My heart which is filled with misery by their wailing ... may they calm.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>39. <hi rend='italic'>er-bi ugû<note place='foot'>Written
<hi rend='italic'>A-KA</hi>. An unpublished Berlin syllabar gives
<hi rend='italic'>A-KA (uga)</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>muḫḫu</hi>.</note>-mà
mu-un-mà-mà-dam</hi></l>
<l>39. Their weeping is made unto me.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>40. <hi rend='italic'>E+SAL<note place='foot'>Br. 5515. For this sign with value
<hi rend='italic'>maštaku</hi>, see <hi rend='smallcaps'>Delitzsch</hi>, H. W.,
<hi rend='italic'>sub voce</hi> and BA., V
620, 20. The Sumerian value is <hi rend='italic'>ama</hi>, Chicago Syllabar, 241
in AJSL. 33, 182.</note> šag-izi-du ma-ar
ma-[an-tuk-tuk-e-ne-ám]</hi><note place='foot'>Restored from an unpublished text in
Constantinople, Ni. 721.</note></l>
<l>40. In the mother goddess' sanctuary prayer to me they offer.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>41. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil</hi>....</l>
<l>41. Enlil....</l>
</lg>

<p>
(About twelve lines broken away.)<note place='foot'>Section 4 ended somewhere in this
break.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reverse II</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. ....</l>
<l>1. ....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. ....</l>
<l>2. ....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. ....</l>
<l>3. ....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. [ ... <hi rend='italic'>mu-ra-ab-</hi>]<hi rend='italic'>dúg mu- na-ab</hi></l>
<l>4. ....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. ... <hi rend='italic'>ŭg-ga-gim</hi></l>
<l>5. ....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. [ ... <hi rend='italic'>m</hi>]<hi rend='italic'>u-ra-ab-dúg
mu-na-ab</hi><note place='foot'>Probably a refrain.</note></l>
<l>6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. ... <hi rend='italic'>aga- ... a- ... mu</hi></l>
<l>7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. ... <hi rend='italic'>mu- ... na- ... ab</hi></l>
<l>8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. [...]<hi rend='italic'>ma-a[r ... za]l-la</hi></l>
<l>9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. ... <hi rend='italic'>íb-dū-e KA-mu-na- ab</hi></l>
<l>10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. ... <hi rend='italic'>ģar-ra-ge-eš ... šag-izi-du</hi></l>
<l>11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. ... <hi rend='italic'>arruš<note place='foot'>For the reading, see AJSL. 33,
182, 240.</note> ma-ra-tuk-tuk</hi><note place='foot'>See BL. 128, 21.</note></l>
<l>12. Have mercy upon me.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>šag-zu šag-sīg ib-ta-ba-e
šag-laģ ma-ra-an-gar-ra-me</hi> (sic!)<note place='foot'>Read
<hi rend='italic'>A-AN</hi>, i. e., <hi rend='italic'>ám</hi>.</note></l>
<l>13. Thy heart whose portion has been affliction become for me a glad heart.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>sag-zuzi-zi-i<note place='foot'>Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>sag-bi zi-zi</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, K.L. 199
I 36.</note>giš-šub-ba-za ul-šú<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Lang.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Liturgical Texts</hi> 154, 16.</note> ma-ra-an-mà-mà</hi></l>
<l>14. Thy head which is held aloof turn unto me to glorify thy portion.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>ág-kúr-ri za-ar<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>AR</hi>
is written <hi rend='italic'>ŠI+ḪU</hi>!</note> i-ri-ib-aga-e šu-bi
dé-ib-gí-gí</hi><note place='foot'>The second sign <hi rend='italic'>gí</hi> is
only partially made by the scribe.</note></l>
<l>15. The hostile deeds which he did unto thee be returned unto his hand.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>uru-ki-a šu-bar-ri nu-zu-a mur-ri<note place='foot'>The
analysis of the text and the meaning are difficult. Perhaps <hi rend='italic'>a</hi>
should be taken with
the following sign <hi rend='italic'>a-ḪAR-ri</hi>, an unknown
ideogram. <hi rend='italic'>mur-ri</hi> is here taken for
<hi rend='italic'>rigmu</hi>.</note> dé-ib-sĭg-gi</hi></l>
<l>16. In the city which knew not forgiveness
let there be given <hi rend='italic'>the cry of multitudes</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. ... <hi rend='italic'>ki-šub gú 5-kam-ma-ám</hi></l>
<l>17. A melody of prostrations. Fifth section.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>à-še ù-mu-un-zu gú-šub-ba kúr me-e-ši-in-ra-ám</hi></l>
<l>18. Now thy lord <hi rend='italic'>anger upon the foe</hi> will direct.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>arruš<note place='foot'>See line 12 above.</note>
ma-ra-an-tuk-ám na-ám-zu in-tar-ra-ám</hi></l>
<l>19. He will have mercy and will decree thy fate.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. <hi rend='italic'>síg-zu a-še-ir ib-ta-an-è-a ib-si be-in-dúg-ga-ám</hi></l>
<l>20. Unto thy brick walls where lamentation arose he will command <q>it
is enough.</q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>ģar-šág-gi-zu-ra<note place='foot'>Sic! Demonstrative pronoun.
See <hi rend='italic'>Sum. Gr.</hi> § 163.</note> ma-ra-ni-in-tu-ra-ám</hi></l>
<l>21. Thy happy soul he will cause to return for me.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-urašā
maškim kalag-ga sag-zu be-in-tuk-ám</hi><note place='foot'>Here we have the
first occurrence of the original expression for <hi rend='italic'>kullu ša rêši</hi>;
cf. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Br.</hi> 11244.</note></l>
<l>22. Ninurash the valiant guardsman will sustain thy head.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'>dun-ú-a-ni ... giš-ib-ši-in-gub-ba-ám</hi><note place='foot'>Cf.
SBP. 330, 10.</note></l>
<l>23. His pastor<note place='foot'>The epithet refers to Išme-Dagan.</note>
he will establish over (the city).</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>é-kur ḳalag-ḳalag dū-dū-ù-dam á-mu-un<note place='foot'>This
word is obscure and unknown.</note> ba-an-ag-ám</hi></l>
<l>24. Ekur like (a temple) which has been tenderly built he will make....</l>
</lg>

<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>ág-dú-bi ki-bi be-in-gí-ám</hi></l>
<l>25. Its beauty he will restore to its place.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26, 27. <hi rend='italic'>gi-gŭn-na-bi<note place='foot'>On
<hi rend='italic'>gigunna</hi>, part of the stage tower, see VAB. IV
237 n. 2; BL. 38, 14.</note> ki-gí-gí-bi ud-gim kar-kar-bi</hi><note place='foot'>Cf.
SBP. 328, 5.</note></l>
<l>26, 27. That its great dark chamber be restored to its place,
that it shine like day</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28. <hi rend='italic'>suģ<note place='foot'>Written Br. 3046. See Br.
3035.</note>-ba-la-túm-túm-mu in-na-an-dúg-ga-ám</hi></l>
<l>28. Unceasingly he commands.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29. <hi rend='italic'>garza kúr-ri ib- sūģ<note place='foot'>Br.
11208.</note>- ám</hi></l>
<l>29. The ordinances the stranger has placed in confusion.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>30. <hi rend='italic'>me<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>me</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>parṣu</hi>, refers primarily to the rubrics of the rituals,
the ritualistic directions, but here
the reference is clearly to the utensils employed in the rituals.</note>
ib-bir-a-bi ki-bi-šú in-gar-ra-ám</hi></l>
<l>30. The ritual utensils which have been scattered he will restore to their place.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31. <hi rend='italic'>šu-luģ
erím<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>NE-RU.</hi></note>-e šu-be-in-lá-a-ba</hi></l>
<l>31. The rituals of hand-washing which the wicked caused to lapse into
disuse,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>lal, lá-a</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>šuḳammumu</hi>, see SBP. 66, 20.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32. <hi rend='italic'>azag-gi ... el-e- ... bi</hi></l>
<l>32. To cause to be holy and pure</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33. <hi rend='italic'>uru-azag nam-šub-da-ni in-na-an-dúg-ga-ám</hi></l>
<l>33. In the holy city which has been consecrated he commands.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>34. <hi rend='italic'>[<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>]
Iš-me-<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Da-gan sib
kenag-gà-ni-ir</hi><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>ir</hi> is uncertain.
The sign may be either <hi rend='italic'>dū</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>ni</hi>.</note></l>
<l>34. For Ishme-Dagan his beloved shepherd</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>35. <hi rend='italic'>... bi(?) gú ul-šár-šár-ri-da</hi></l>
<l>35. ... to cause rejoicing</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>36. <hi rend='italic'>in-na-an-dúg-ga-ám</hi></l>
<l>36. ... he commands.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>37. ... <hi rend='italic'>azag nam-tar-ri-da-ni</hi></l>
<l>37. The holy ... whose fate has been decreed,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>38. ... <hi rend='italic'>-ra-ám</hi></l>
<l>38. ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>39. ... <hi rend='italic'>DU-ra-ám</hi></l>
<l>39. ...</l>
</lg>

<p>
(About twelve lines broken away, in case this section continued to the end of
the tablet.)
</p>

</div>

<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Liturgy of Ishme-Dagan. 11005 (No. 2)</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Col. II.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>...</l>
<l>...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-lil
lugal dingir-ri-e-ne-ge</hi></l>
<l>3. Enlil king of the gods</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>sig igi-nim-ma nam-en-bi ģa-ma-an-sĭg</hi></l>
<l>4. In the South and North<note place='foot'>Literally, <q>Below and above.</q></note>
may give lordship over them unto me.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>dúg-dúg-ga
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nu-nam-nir-ra-ta</hi></l>
<l>5. By the commands of Nunamnir,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>ka-ta-è-a
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-lil-lá-ta</hi></l>
<l>6. By the utterance of Enlil,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>An-ni enim-zid-démà-a-ar ģa-ma-an-de</hi></l>
<l>7. May Anu speak for me an order of confidence.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>šibir-šibir šu-mu ģe-ma-sĭg</hi></l>
<l>8. Scepters may he give unto my hand.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Uraša-e
dû-azag-ga<note place='foot'>Probably a variant of <hi rend='italic'>dù-azag</hi>. As
the phrase is written <hi rend='italic'>dug-azag-ga</hi> might mean <q>holy
knees,</q> <hi rend='italic'>birku ellitu</hi>, but that is not probable. A parallel
passage occurs in the liturgy to Dungi,
BE. 31, 12, 8, where my interpretation is to be corrected.
For <hi rend='italic'>dù</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>dŭ</hi>, rendered into Semitic by
the loan-word <hi rend='italic'>dû</hi>, with the sense <q>high altar,
pedestal of a statue, altar or throne room</q> see
AJSL. 32, 107.</note>-ni-a sal-zid ģa-ma-ni-dúg</hi></l>
<l>9. May Uraša bestow upon me faithful care in his holy throne room.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-lil-li
šag lăg-lăg-ga-ni</hi><note place='foot'>Cf. Gudea, Cyl. B 13, 4.</note></l>
<l>10. Ninlil whose heart is pure,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>bara-maģ ud-sud-du gú-KU-MAL</hi><note place='foot'>This phrase
should have a meaning similar to <q>speak words of peace,</q> <q>assure, comfort.</q>
The expression occurs also in Gudea, Cyl. A 7, 5, Ningirsu, son of Enlil
<hi rend='italic'>gú za-ra ma-ra-ģun-gà-e</hi>,
<q>will speak to thee words of peace.</q></note></l>
<l>11. She that in the far-famed chapel <hi rend='italic'>assures</hi> length of days,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>giš-šub-ba-mà bal-bi šág-gi-da</hi></l>
<l>12. She that renders good my portion exceedingly,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>kuš<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>kuš</hi>, preposition =
<hi rend='italic'>eli</hi>, is derived from <hi rend='italic'>kuš</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>zumru</hi>, <q>body,</q> literally <q>at the
body.</q></note>-<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-lil-lá ka-dug-gi-mà</hi></l>
<l>13. She who unto Enlil spoke assuringly for me good words,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>é-kur-ri ud-šu-uš sag-uš-mà</hi></l>
<l>14. She who daily protects Ekur for me,<note place='foot'>In view of the parallel
passages where kings are called the <hi rend='italic'>sag-uš</hi> of temples and
cities (i. e. the <hi rend='italic'>mukînu</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>mukîl rêš</hi>)
it seems necessary to render <hi rend='italic'>é-kur-ri</hi> as the object of
<hi rend='italic'>sag-uš</hi>. See SAK.
197 below c 5; BE. 29 No. 1 IV 6; PBS. V No. 73. A rendering, <q>She who raiseth
me up daily in Ekur</q> is possible.</note></l>
</lg>

<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>ki-úr ki-gal-e<note place='foot'>Cf. SBP. 52, 5; BL. p.
138.</note> nam šu-ģa-ma-ni-tar</hi></l>
<l>15. May render me my fate in Kenur the vast place.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-ki
en-gal erida-(ki)-ga-ge</hi></l>
<l>16. May Enki the great lord of Eridu</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>ganun zid-maģ sag-mà ģa-ma-ni-in-uš</hi>(?)</l>
<l>17. Sustain(?) my head in the ritual chamber, the faithful, the far-famed.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reverse I</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>ki-úr gal-la li-bi tar-ri-ge</hi></l>
<l>5. Of the great Kenur its care....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-lil-li
á-bi ģu-mu-da-na-ág</hi></l>
<l>6. Of Enlil his oracle be proclaimed.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>dúg-dúg-ga a-a
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-lil-lá-šú</hi></l>
<l>7. Unto the words of father Enlil&mdash;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Iš-me-
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Da-gan me-en gú-mu ģe-in-ši-ri</hi></l>
<l>8. Ishme-Dagan am I&mdash;verily my neck I will turn.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>ka-ta-è-a lugal-mà-šú giš-túg-ni<note place='foot'>Sic!
third person.</note> ģe-im-ši-ag</hi></l>
<l>9. To the utterance of my king may I lend my<note place='foot'>Text
<q>his.</q></note> ears.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>ki-en-gi-ra nig-si-sá ģe-ni-in-gar</hi></l>
<l>10. In Sumer justice may I institute.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>Nibru-(ki) an-gim gú ģe-im-mi-uš</hi></l>
<l>11. Nippur may I exalt like heaven.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>é-kur-ra me-bi ģu-mu-un-ŭr-ŭr</hi></l>
<l>12. Of Ekur its decrees I will deliver.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>giš(?)-ģar(?) ù-a-ba li-be-[in-tar]</hi></l>
<l>13. Of the plans(?) unto their care may I give heed.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>garza<note place='foot'>Or read <hi rend='italic'>billudu</hi>.
This passage proves that <hi rend='italic'>garza</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>billudu</hi>
really do have a meaning, sanctuary, cult object or something synonymous. See
<hi rend='italic'>billudû</hi> in VAB. IV Index. The meaning,
sanctuary, has been suggested for the Semitic <hi rend='italic'>parṣu</hi>
and this must be taken into consideration.</note>
ki-ta šub-ba-bi ki-bi ģe-[mu-un-gí]</hi></l>
<l>14. The sacred relics which have fallen from their
places may I restore to their places.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-lil-lá
me ḳal-ḳalag-[ni]</hi></l>
<l>15. Of Enlil his precious decrees&mdash;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Iš-me-<hi
rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Da-gan me-en</hi>....</l>
<l>16. I am Ishme-Dagan&mdash;I will....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-lil-lá</hi>....</l>
<l>17. Of Ninlil her ... I will....</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='innini-3'/>
<head>Liturgical Hymn to Innini. 7847 (No. 3 and duplicate No. 4)</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Col. I</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>nin me-dug-ga<note place='foot'>Var.
<hi rend='italic'>šar-ra</hi>.</note> babbar dalla-è-a</hi></l>
<l>1. Oh lady of the good decrees, that risest splendidly like the sun.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>sai-zid me-lam gùr-ru kenag
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Uraša-a</hi></l>
<l>2. Faithful woman, bearing a sheen  of terrible splendor, beloved of Urashâ,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>nu-gig an-na nin(?) sìr-gal-gal-la</hi></l>
<l>3. Heavenly virgin, queen(?)<note place='foot'>Var. is certainly
not <hi rend='italic'>nin</hi>.</note> of the great songs,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>aga-zi-dé ... nam-en-na tum-ma</hi></l>
<l>4. Who <hi rend='italic'>puttest on</hi> a faithful crown, who
hast been created fit for rulership,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>me-imin-bi šu-sá-dúg-ga</hi></l>
<l>5. Whose hand attaineth the seven decrees,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>nin-mu me-gal-gal-la sag-sìr-bi za-e me-en</hi></l>
<l>6. My queen, of the great decrees their directress<note place='foot'>For
<hi rend='italic'>sag-sìr</hi>, see also ASKT. 96, 25; K. L., 199, 15; 199
Col. III 51; CT. 24, 15, 79.</note> art thou.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>me-mu<note place='foot'>Var.
<hi rend='italic'>mu-e</hi>.</note>-ila me šu-zu-šú mu-e-lal</hi></l>
<l>7. The decrees thou bearest; the decrees thou holdest in thy hand.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>me-mu<note place='foot'>Same as previous
footnote.</note>-ḳin me gab-zu be-tab</hi></l>
<l>8. The decrees thou directest; the decrees thou claspest to thy breast(?)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>ušumgal-gim kur-ra sub ba-e-sĭg</hi></l>
<l>9. Like a champion thou subduest the foreign lands.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Immer-gim
ki tù-gí-a<note place='foot'>Cf. Ni. 4581 Obv. 8 in PBS. X pt. 2, where it is
connected with <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Immer</hi>.
Var. <hi rend='italic'>KA-gí-a!</hi></note> <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Ašnan
la-ba-ši-gál</hi></l>
<l>10. Like the storm-god in the place of the ... curse the
grain-goddess thou leavest not.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>a-ma-ru kur-bi-ta è-de</hi></l>
<l>11. A whirlwind upon their lands thou sendest.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>sag-kal-an-ki-a dingir-ri-bi<note place='foot'>Read
<hi rend='italic'>ḪU</hi> for <hi rend='italic'>RI</hi>(?).
<hi rend='italic'>mušen</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>bêlu</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>beltu</hi>, cf. PBS. V 15 Rev. 14. Render <q>Their
divine queen thou art</q>?</note> me-en</hi></l>
<l>12. Oh leader of heaven and earth their divinity thou art.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>ne-ne-ne-ra kalam-ma a-an-mal</hi></l>
<l>13. For them thou didst create the Land (of Sumer).</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>dingiri-ir<note place='foot'>Var. <hi rend='italic'>ni</hi>.
Sic!</note> me-sĭg-gà<note place='foot'>Var. <hi rend='italic'>ma</hi>.</note>
nin-ur-ra-ū-a</hi><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>ḫāmimat kiššati</hi>.</note></l>
<l>14. That givest orders unto the gods(?), queen that guidest the universe.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>enim-azag-an-na-ta enim dúg-dúg</hi></l>
<l>15. That utterest command by the holy order of Anu.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>garza-gal-gal-la gar zu a-ba mu- ... un- ... zu</hi></l>
<l>16. The great decisions who (but thee) knoweth to teach?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>kur-gul-gul ud-de-da ba-e-sĭg</hi></l>
<l>17. Thou that shatterest the mountains, by a spirit of wrath thou art filled.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>kenag <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-lil-lá
kalam-ma im-mi-ni-ri</hi></l>
<l>18. Beloved of Enlil, thou hast founded the Land.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>á-aga <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-lil
ba-gub-bi me-en</hi></l>
<l>19. Thou art she that hast effected the mandate of Ninlil.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. <hi rend='italic'>nin-mu za-pa-ág-zu-šú kur ni-gam-gam-e</hi></l>
<l>20. My lady, at thy cry the lands quake.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>ní-me-lam-ra<note place='foot'>Sic! Prepositions
<hi rend='italic'>ra</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>da</hi> in the same
phrase!</note>-zu-da nam-lù-găl-lu</hi></l>
<l>21. At the fear of thy splendor let mankind</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>nig-me-gar gĭr-bi ù-mu-ri-gub</hi></l>
<l>22. With shouting await thee.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'>me-te me-ģuš<note place='foot'>Text
<hi rend='italic'>gĭr</hi>!</note>-bi šu-ba-e-ri-ti</hi></l>
<l>23. Fittingly they have received their terrible decrees from thee.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>i-lu er-ra-zu gál-la-ra-ab-šéš</hi>(?)</l>
<l>24. Thy lamentations and mournings let them wail for thee.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>é-a nir-gal-gal-la sil-ba mu-ri-du</hi></l>
<l>25. Unto the temple the chief singers shall walk the streets for thee(??).</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. <hi rend='italic'>igi-mé-ta gar ma-ra-ta-si-ig<note place='foot'>Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>mar-zen</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>gar-zen</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>ḫâšu</hi>, SBP. 116, 33; K.L., 15 II 12.</note></hi></l>
<l>26. From before the face of battle they hasten unto thee.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. <hi rend='italic'>nin-mu á-ní-za enim-enim-ni-dúg-e</hi></l>
<l>27. My lady, of thy <hi rend='italic'>fury</hi> they speak.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28. <hi rend='italic'>ud-ul-ul-gim ni-dú-dú-ne</hi></l>
<l>28. The spirit<note place='foot'>In liturgies usually translated by <q>the
Word.</q></note> like an onrushing storm rushed over them.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>

<lg>
<l>29. <hi rend='italic'>ud ka-ra-ta uku im-da-ab-ra-ra</hi></l>
<l>29. The spirit with a loud cry annihilated the people.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>30. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Immer-da
tù-mu-da-an-gí-gí-in</hi></l>
<l>30. By the storm god they were ... accursed.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31. <hi rend='italic'>im-ģul-im-ģul-da im-da-kuš-ù-ne</hi></l>
<l>31. By the storm winds they were brought to woe.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32. <hi rend='italic'>gĭr-za sil kuš-ù i-ni- si</hi></l>
<l>32. Thy foot hastens restless in the street.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33. <hi rend='italic'>balag a-nir-da i-lu mu-un-da-ab-bi</hi></l>
<l>33. Upon the lyre of weeping they utter lamentation.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>34. <hi rend='italic'>nin-mu <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>A-nun-na
dingir-gal-gal-e-ne</hi></l>
<l>34. Oh my lady, the Anunnaki, the great gods,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>35. <hi rend='italic'>su-din-(ģu)-dal-a-gim<note place='foot'>Cf. SBP. 6, 16.</note>
dul-dé mu-e-ši-ba-ra-aš</hi></l>
<l>35. Like a flying <hi rend='italic'>sudin</hi>-bird from the crannies hasten
unto thee.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>36. <hi rend='italic'>igi-gĭr-a-za-la<note place='foot'>For
<hi rend='italic'>ra</hi>. Read <hi rend='italic'>za-la</hi> for
<hi rend='italic'>lal-la</hi>?</note>-ba-lag-gi-eš-a<note place='foot'>Note the
overhanging vowel <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> denoting a dependent phrase without a
relative introductory
adverb, and see also <hi rend='italic'>Sum. Gr.</hi> page 163, examples
cited <hi rend='italic'>bé-in-da-ra-dú-a</hi>, etc.</note></hi></l>
<l>36. When before thy feet they run,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>37. <hi rend='italic'>sag-ki gĭr-a-za sag-nu-mu-un-ne-gà-gà<note place='foot'>The
plural of this verb has been indicated by doubling the root, a case of analogy, being
influenced by the similar plural formation of nouns. See <hi rend='italic'>Sum. Gr.</hi>
§ 124. An example of the
same kind is <hi rend='italic'>sag-nu-mu-un-da-ab-gà-gà</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>ul ì-ir-ru-šu</hi>, <q>they approached it not,</q> K. 8531, 6 in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hrozny</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ninrag</hi>, p. 8.</note></hi></l>
<l>37. Unto the presence of thy feet they attain not.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>38. <hi rend='italic'>šag-ūb-ba-za ba-a ni-te-en-[te-en]</hi></l>
<l>38. Thine angry heart who shall pacify?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>39. <hi rend='italic'>šag-ģul-la-za te-[en-te-en-na-ám]</hi></l>
<l>39. Thine evilly disposed heart let become calm.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>40. <hi rend='italic'>nin ģar-ni šág nin[... -ni- ...]</hi></l>
<l>40. Oh lady, whose soul is magnanimous; oh lady [whose ... is ... ]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>41. <hi rend='italic'>ib-ba nu-te-en-[te-en....]</hi></l>
<l>41. Whose wrath is unpacified....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>42. <hi rend='italic'>nin-kur-ra-dirig-ga....</hi></l>
<l>42. Lady that stormeth over the mountains....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>43. <hi rend='italic'>ģar<note place='foot'>Text <hi rend='italic'>ub!</hi> Read
<hi rend='italic'>ub sag-ki-za</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>tupḳi pani-ki</hi>(??).</note>-sag ki-za ba....</hi></l>
<l>43. The mountains (?) thy place (?)....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>44. <hi rend='italic'>ká-gal-a</hi></l>
<l>44. The great gate....</l>
</lg>

<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Col. II</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>ģalba<note place='foot'>For the form, see PBS. V 102 IV
3.</note>-ba nu</hi>....</l>
<l>1. Its frost....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>ki <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>kuš</hi>lu-úb</hi>....</l>
<l>2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>ka-sìr-la</hi>(?)<note place='foot'>If
<hi rend='italic'>la</hi> be correct, then the reading is
<hi rend='italic'>ka-sil-la</hi>.</note>....</l>
<l>3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>nir-da-ni-bi<note place='foot'>Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>nir-da-an</hi>, K. 45, 6, and <hi rend='italic'>nir-da</hi>, Gudea,
Cyl. A 12, 26 with 18, 3 where <hi rend='italic'>nig-erim</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>nir-da</hi>.</note></hi>....</l>
<l>4. Their afflictions....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>uru tuš dinig-di-bi mer-i-in-si-[si]</hi></l>
<l>5. Their city, an arid habitation, the whirlwinds have filled.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>ḳal-šag-gan-bi ... -šú ma-ra-ab-mú-[mú]</hi></l>
<l>6. Their ... workmen in ... supplicate thee.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>uru-zagin-ra li-be-in-dúg-ga<note place='foot'>For
<hi rend='italic'>i-lu-dúg</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>ṣarāḫu</hi>.</note></hi></l>
<l>7. For the brilliant city they mourn in song.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>a-a uku-za li-be-in-eš-a-a</hi></l>
<l>8. The father thy creator sends forth cries of distress for
it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>a-a</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>è-a</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>aṣû</hi>. CT. 15, 11, 7; K. L. 3<hi rend='italic'>b</hi> 28. Cf. also
the N. Pr. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Gišbar-a</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Gišbar-è</hi>.
<q>The fire-god causes to come forth.</q></note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>ka-azag-zu dé-in-dúg-dúg gĭr-za ģe-ib-gí</hi></l>
<l>9. May thy holy mouth speak the command and thy feet return.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>šă-ab-bi-ta ģuš ģe-ib-ta-an-zí-ni</hi></l>
<l>10. From her midst mayest thou cast the cruel one.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>sal-bi dam-a-ni-ta šág-ga-na-áš
an<note place='foot'>So the text for <hi rend='italic'>šág-ga-áš
na-an-da-ab-bi</hi>.</note>-da- ab- bi</hi></l>
<l>11. Let a woman with her husband speak kindly.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>gíg-ù-na-la<note place='foot'>See above, line 36.</note>
na-an-ba-ni-ib-gí-gí</hi></l>
<l>12. During the nights forever let her return unto him.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>nig-azag šag-ga-na nam-mu-da-an-bur-ri</hi></l>
<l>13. That which is pure in her heart may she disclose.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>ù-gul-zi-zi-i dumu-gal
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Zu-en-na-áš</hi></l>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>Fervid</hi> intercession unto the great son, Sin,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>nin dingir-ra dirig-ga<note place='foot'>For the construction
<hi rend='italic'>dirig</hi> with <hi rend='italic'>ra</hi>, see
<hi rend='italic'>lù-ne-ir dirig</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>eli annim rabi</hi>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Poebel</hi>, PBS V 152 32.</note> a-ba ki-za ba-an-tum</hi></l>
<l>15. Oh lady surpassing the gods who beside thee brings?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>me-zi-de nin-gal nin-e-ne</hi></l>
<l>16. Establisher of decrees, oh great lady, their lady,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>uru-azag-ta è-a ama-uku-ni-ir dirig-ga<note place='foot'>See
previous footnote.</note></hi></l>
<l>17. Thou that risest from the holy city, thou that surpassest
his<note place='foot'>Refers to Sin.</note> child-bearing mother,</l>
</lg>

<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>gal-zu igi-gál nin kur-kur-ra</hi></l>
<l>18. Intelligent and wise, oh queen of the lands,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>zi-gál kalama-zu-a sìr-azag-zu ga-a-an-dúg</hi></l>
<l>19. Oh breath of life of thy Land, I will recite thy holy songs.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. <hi rend='italic'>dingir zi-me-a tum-ma ki-bi dúg- -ga-bi....</hi></l>
<l>20. Divinity who has been made agreeable unto the fury of
battle, whose words unto their place....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>šag-sud-du sal-zid lăg-lăg-ga me-zu ga-mu-ra-ab-dúg</hi>(?)</l>
<l>21. Thou of the unsearchable heart, who purgest faithfully, I
will relate thy decrees.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>mi-ib-azag-gà ģu-mu-e-ši-in-tu-ri</hi></l>
<l>22. The holy <hi rend='italic'>mi-ib</hi> weapon
verily thou causest to enter upon (the foe).</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'>en me-en en- ... -ul-an-na me-en</hi></l>
<l>23. <q>A ruler am I, a ruler ... of heaven am I.<note place='foot'>Here begins
abruptly a passage spoken by the goddess herself. This is not unusual in
liturgical texts.</note></q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>gi-ma-sá-ab ni-gùr-ru kešda-bi-dúg</hi></l>
<l>24. The reed censer I bear and I arrange the ritual(?).</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>ki-sĭg-ga be-in-gar mà-e nu-mu-un-ne -ti-li</hi></l>
<l>25. At the parentalia I place it; and these things I cease not to do.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. <hi rend='italic'>ud-de ba-nim ud-eš da(?)-bíl</hi></l>
<l>26. By day I ... and daily renew</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. <hi rend='italic'>giš-gig ud-de ba-nim? -da im-mi-dù</hi></l>
<l>27. By night and day I ... and in ... am clothed(?)<note place='foot'>The sign
is <hi rend='italic'>dù</hi>, not <hi rend='italic'>dul</hi>.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28. <hi rend='italic'>KA-lál-mu šu-? a-ba-ab-tum</hi></l>
<l>28. My ... of honey ... I bring.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29. <hi rend='italic'>ninda-mur-šág-šág-mu da-ta ba-e-de-gí</hi></l>
<l>29. By my pious offerings of baked cakes thou wilt be pacified.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>30. <hi rend='italic'>nam-mu <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-lil
lugal an-ki</hi></l>
<l>30. Something Enlil lord of heaven and earth</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31. <hi rend='italic'>an-ra enim-mu-na-ab an-e ģa-ba-duģ-e</hi></l>
<l>31. To Anu spoke as a command and verily Heaven is opened.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32. <hi rend='italic'>a-da-lam an-ra enim-mu-na-ab an-e mu-e-tūb</hi></l>
<l>32. Now unto Anu he has spoken the command and thou causest Heaven to shudder.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33. <hi rend='italic'>nam-lugal-an-ni sal-e ba-ab-kár-ri-en</hi></l>
<l>33. The royal power of Anu thou a woman hast seized.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>....</l>
<l>....</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Psalm to Enlil Containing a Long Intercession
by the Mother Goddess. 15204 (No. 5)</head>

<p>
This liturgical psalm in one melody adds one more document
of this kind to the classical Sumerian corpus of old short
musical services on which the later complex liturgies were based.<note place='foot'>For
a discussion of these early Sumerian single song services, see the writer's
<hi rend='italic'>Babylonian Liturgies</hi>, pp. XXXVII ff.</note>
The title, <hi rend='italic'>árabu-(ģu) árabu-(ģu) múzu kúrra munmállašu záe
alménna</hi>, arranged in seven dactyls, does not appear in the catalogue
of old songs given in the Assyrian list, IV Raw. 53 Col. III.
Since the greater part of the psalm consists in an address of the
mother goddess to Enlil on behalf of Nippur, the composition is
defined as an adoration of <q>my mother,</q><note place='foot'>See also line
13.</note> an epithet applied to
Innini by the singers in most liturgies. The psalm begins with
twelve lines sung by the choir and addressed to Enlil. They
then in lines 13-15 introduce Innini whom they represent in
discourse before Enlil in lines 16-47. This part of the song
service contains refrains characteristic of public worship. Theologically
the text illustrates one of the most profound principles
of Sumerian religion, the sympathy and concern of the virgin
mother for mankind.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Tammuz
and Ishtar</hi>, p. 111.</note> The great daily services of the standard
prayer books represent her as a <foreign rend='italic'>mater dolorosa</foreign> and she
with Tammuz shares the vicissitudes of mortal life. Our text is
unique and noteworthy for one salient fact. It illustrates the
scenes so common on Babylonian seals, where the mother goddess
stands in intercession before the god, with one or both hands
raised in supplication and the left foot advanced as though about
to set it on the paved approach to the throne of the deity.
</p>

<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>arâ-bu-(ģu) arâ-bu-(ģu) mu-zu kur-ra mu-un-ma-al-la-šú</hi></l>
<l>1. Oh bird <hi rend='italic'>arabu, arabu</hi>,<note place='foot'>The Sumerian
<hi rend='italic'>arâ-bu</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>UD-DU-BU</hi>) is rendered into
Semitic by the loan-word <hi rend='italic'>arabû</hi>, called
<hi rend='italic'>iṣṣur mēḫu</hi>, bird of the storm, ZA. VI 244, 48. In CT. XII
7<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> 2 <hi rend='italic'>UD-DU</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>ara</hi>) =
<hi rend='italic'>namru</hi>, fierce,
raging, where the entry is followed by <hi rend='italic'>UD-DU</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>ara</hi>) = <hi rend='italic'>ša UD-DU-bu</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>ģu</hi>), hence in any case a
bird of prey. Were it not for the reference to this bird in the
omen text, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Boissier</hi>, DA 67, 18,
one might conclude that the bird is mythical. For the
reading <hi rend='italic'>arabû</hi>, see also <hi rend='smallcaps'>Reisner</hi>, SBH.
104, 35.</note> thou art he whose name is proclaimed in the world.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>za-e al-me-en-na</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil
arâ-bu-(ģu) mu-zu kur-ra mu-un-ma-al-al-la-šú</hi></l>
<l>3. Oh Enlil, <hi rend='italic'>arabu</hi>-bird, thou art he
whose name is proclaimed in the world.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>za-e al-me-en-na</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil
šag-sud-du e-ne-em zid- da</hi></l>
<l>5. Enlil of unsearchable heart, of faithful word.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>gú ki-ma-al<note place='foot'>=
<hi rend='italic'>ḳadādu ša kišadi</hi>, see SBP. 110, 22, <q>bend the neck,</q>
i. e., <q>grant favor.</q></note> e-ne-em di- di<note place='foot'>Cf. V Raw.
39<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> 33.</note></hi></l>
<l>6. He that bends the neck, that speaks the word.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>mu-zu kur-ra mu-un-ma-al-la-šú za-e al-me-en- na</hi></l>
<l>7. Thou art he whose name is proclaimed in the world.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>mu-zu kur-ra mu-un-ma-al-la-šú</hi></l>
<l>8. At thy name which is proclaimed in the world,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>dúg-ga-zu kur-ra ám-da-ma-al-la-šú</hi></l>
<l>9. At thy discourse which is proclaimed in the world,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>taģ-a-zu kur-ra ám-da-ma-al-la-šú</hi></l>
<l>10. At thy aid which is wrought in the world,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>uru-me-a<note place='foot'>Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>dagan-me-a</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>ina puḫri-ni</hi>, RA.
XI 144, 8.</note> an ní-bi nam-dúb ki ní-bi nam- sīg</hi></l>
<l>11. In my city heaven trembles of itself, earth quakes of
itself.<note place='foot'>Cf. SBP. 45, 13; 79, 13; 98, 44, etc.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>nibru-(ki)-a an ní-bi nam-dúb ki ní-bi nam- sīg</hi></l>
<l>12. In Nippur the heaven trembles of itself, earth quakes of itself.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>ama mu-gíg-gi ama nu-bar-ra ama-mu ni-mi-ni-in-gí-gí</hi></l>
<l>13. The mother virgin, the mother courtesan, my mother began discourse.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>[...]-e
ga-ša-an urú-bar-ra-ra<note place='foot'>For this method of forming the
plural see <hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Grammar</hi>, § 124. For
<hi rend='italic'>uru-bar</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>kapru</hi>,
see <hi rend='smallcaps'>Meissner</hi>, SAI. 543. Note also
<hi rend='italic'>umun urú-bar</hi>, SBH. 22, 57 = 19, 56 and K. 69 Obv. 20. title
of Nergal as lord of the city of the dead.</note></hi></l>
<l>14. She the divine ..., queen of the villages,</l>
</lg>

<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>

<lg>
<l>15. ... <hi rend='italic'>ni-mi-ni-in-gí- ... gí</hi></l>
<l>15. ... discoursed.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. ... <hi rend='italic'>ku-a-zu- ... dé</hi></l>
<l>16. When in ... thou dwellest,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. ... <hi rend='italic'>-la ku-gar-ra<note place='foot'>Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>Historical and Religious Texts</hi>, p. 34, 6.</note>-zu-dé</hi></l>
<l>17. When in ... thou makest thy abode,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>[<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-lil-da?]<note
place='foot'>For Ninlil as queen of Keš, see also
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, KL. 23 3; SBP. 23 note 17. At Keš she
was identified with the unmarried and earlier deity Ninharsag.</note>
ga-ša-an keš-(ki)-a-ge</hi></l>
<l>18. With Ninlil (?) queen of Keš</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. ... <hi rend='italic'>ģen mu-e-da-ab-tar-ri</hi></l>
<l>19. ... thou decreest.</l>
</lg>

<p>
...<note place='foot'>The line drawn across the tablet intersects the
address of Innini and, if not for some unknown
musical purpose, must be regarded as an error.</note>
</p>

<lg>
<l>20. ... <hi rend='italic'>ge me-ri-mu-šú<note place='foot'>For the construction,
see <hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Grammar</hi>, § 91.</note> nu-GÁ-e</hi></l>
<l>20. [As I was ...] my foot I lifted
not.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>GA</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>našû</hi>, variant
of <hi rend='italic'>ga (ILA)</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>našû</hi>. The figure of lifting
the foot and raising the hand
(line 30) to Enlil refers to the attitude of adoration assumed by
the mother goddess as she stands
before one of the gods and intercedes for mankind. She is
frequently depicted on seals in this
attitude; see for example <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ward</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Seal Cylinders of Western Asia</hi>,
303<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>, 304, 308, etc.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>[a-a-mu lu-]lu-mu-ùr<note place='foot'>The suffixed pronoun
<hi rend='italic'>mu</hi> with affixed preposition <hi rend='italic'>ra</hi>.</note>
su-din-ģu ab-ba-ge</hi></l>
<l>21. To my father, my benefactor, as a <hi rend='italic'>sudin</hi>-bird
of the sea,<note place='foot'>Innini is compared to the
<hi rend='italic'>sudin</hi>-bird in SBP. 6, 16 also.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>me-ri-mu-šú nu-GA-e</hi></l>
<l>22. My foot I lifted not.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil-]-e
šag-sud-da</hi></l>
<l>23. [To Enlil of] unsearchable heart,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>[ù-mu-un e-ne]-em zi-da</hi></l>
<l>24. [Lord] of faithful word,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>[gú ki-ma-al e-]ne-em di-di</hi></l>
<l>25. That bends the neck, that speaks the word,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. ... <hi rend='italic'>ge me-ri-mu-šú nu-GA-e</hi></l>
<l>26. [As I was ...] my foot I lifted not.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. <hi rend='italic'>[<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil ?]-e
me-ri-mu-šú ù<note place='foot'>For the optative use of
this vowel, see <hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Grammar</hi>, § 217.</note>-GA-e</hi></l>
<l>27. [But unto Enlil] I would lift my foot.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28. ... <hi rend='italic'>-ra ga-ám-ši-rá</hi></l>
<l>28. Unto ... verily I will go;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29. <hi rend='italic'>[me-ri]-mu-šú ga-mu-ni-ib-GA</hi></l>
<l>29. My foot I will lift.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>30. <hi rend='italic'>[a-a-mu]lu-lu-mu-ùr  ga-ám-ši-rá</hi></l>
<l>30. To my father, my benefactor, verily I will go;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31. <hi rend='italic'>me-ri-mu-šú ga-mu-ni-ib-GA</hi></l>
<l>31. My foot I will lift.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil-ra
šu-mu-šú ga-mu-ni-ib-GA</hi></l>
<l>32. Unto Enlil my hand I will raise;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33. <hi rend='italic'>me-ri-mu-šú ga-mu-ni-ib-GA</hi></l>
<l>33. my foot I will lift.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>

<lg>
<l>34. <hi rend='italic'>me-e <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil-ra
um-ma dé-til</hi></l>
<l>35. ... <hi rend='italic'>ṭu<note place='foot'>Dialectic for
<hi rend='italic'>du</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>da</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>ga</hi>
(by vowel harmony). Note the form <hi rend='italic'>ga-mu-ra-ab-šid</hi> with variant
<hi rend='italic'>da-mu-ra-ab-šid</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Liturgical
Texts</hi>, 155, 30 (variant unpublished). See also <hi rend='italic'>Sumerian
Grammar</hi>, § 50.</note>-mu-na-da- ab- dúg</hi></l>
<l>34. I unto Enlil will say, <q>May the mother live.</q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>36. <hi rend='italic'>a-a-mu lu-lu-mu-ùr ab-ba dé-til</hi></l>
<l>37. ... <hi rend='italic'>ṭu-mu-na-da-ab- dúg</hi></l>
<l>36. Unto my father, my benefactor, I will say, <q>May the father live.</q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>38. <hi rend='italic'>gù-gù gù-si-di ṭu-mu-na-ám-mar</hi></l>
<l>38. Words which set aright all things I will say.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>39. <hi rend='italic'>urú-me-a ama dumu dé-im-me</hi></l>
<l>40. ... <hi rend='italic'>dumu ama dé-im-me</hi></l>
<l>39. In my city may the mother hail her son, may the son hail his
mother.<note place='foot'>For the idea, see also SBP. 292, 25-29.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>41. <hi rend='italic'>nibru-(ki)-a ama dumu-dé-im-me</hi></l>
<l>41. In Nippur may the mother hail her son,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>42. ... <hi rend='italic'>dumu ama dé-im-me</hi></l>
<l>42. may the son hail his mother.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>43. <hi rend='italic'>ùz<note place='foot'>For <hi rend='italic'>ŠURIM</hi> with
value <hi rend='italic'>uz=laḇru</hi>, see <hi rend='smallcaps'>Thompson</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Reports</hi> 103, 11 and supply <hi rend='italic'>u-uz</hi> in CT.
12, 26<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> 22.</note>-e síl-bi ģe-im-ši-ib-še-gi-en</hi></l>
<l>43. To ewe and her lamb may he be propitious.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>44. <hi rend='italic'>e-ne-em <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil-lá
UZ-dé<note place='foot'>The sign for <hi rend='italic'>enzu</hi> certainly
has a phonetic value ending in <hi rend='italic'>d</hi>; note
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Nikolski No. 262</hi>, where
the sign is followed by <hi rend='italic'>da</hi> and <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Kultlieder</hi>, 123 III 9, where it is followed
by <hi rend='italic'>dé</hi>.</note> máš-bi</hi></l>
<l>45. ... <hi rend='italic'>ģe-en-ši-ib-še-gi-en</hi></l>
<l>44. May the word of Enlil be propitious to the she-goat and her kid.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>46. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil-ra
uru-ni še-ib nibru-(ki)</hi></l>
<l>46. For Enlil, his city, brick-walled</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>47. <hi rend='italic'>ki-bi ga-mu-na-ab-gí</hi></l>
<l>47. <q rend='post'>Nippur, unto its place I will restore.</q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>48. <hi rend='italic'>ní-na-teg ní-na-teg ama-mu ní-na teg</hi></l>
<l>48. She offers devotion, she offers devotion, my mother offers devotion.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lamentation on the Pillage of Lagash by the Elamites. 2154 (No. 6)</head>

<p>
This neatly written but seriously damaged single column
tablet carried when complete about fifty-five lines. In style the
liturgical lamentation has a striking resemblance to the lamentation
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
on the invasion of Sumer by the people of Gutium,
published in the author's <hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Liturgical Texts</hi>, 120-124.
The same refrain, <q>How long? oh my destroyed city and my
destroyed temple, sadly I wail,</q> distinguishes both
compositions.<note place='foot'>See lines 3, 23, 31 and 44 below
and lines 5, 14, 21, 27 and 34 of the parallel text in the
volume cited above.</note>
Other lines are common to both threnodies. The contents are
similar to the lamentation on Lagash published in <hi rend='italic'>Cuneiform Texts</hi>
of the British Museum, Vol. XV 22, of which <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi> has
published a variant VAT. 617 Rev. II 10-42, in his <hi rend='italic'>Sumerische
Kultleider</hi>. A translation of the British Museum text will be
found in the author's <hi rend='italic'>Sumerian and Babylonian Psalms</hi>, p. 284,
an edition which can now be improved.
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>a-a</hi>[...]</l>
<l>1. Father [</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>? dingir</hi>[...]</l>
<l>2. ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>a uru-gul-la é-[gul-la-mu gíg-ga-bi im-mi</hi>]</l>
<l>3. How long? oh my destroyed city, my destroyed temple, sadly I
wail.<note place='foot'>This refrain occurs also in
<hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Liturgical Texts</hi>, 121, 5; 122, 14, 17; 123, 21, 27, 34,
where it characterizes a lamentation for various cities of Sumer destroyed by an
invasion from Gutium. The translation given above is preferable
to the interpretation accepted in my previous
volume.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>ud-ba enim ud-dam bi</hi>-[...]</l>
<l>4. At that time the word like a storm ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>enim <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-lil-lá</hi>
[...]</l>
<l>5. The word of Enlil ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-lil
galu nam-tar</hi> [...]</l>
<l>6. Enlil who the fate of ... <hi rend='italic'>determined</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-lil-li
nim</hi>-[...]</l>
<l>7. Enlil ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mà-mà</hi><note
place='foot'>Title of Sin in CT. 25, 42, 5. Note also that
<hi rend='italic'>dumugu</hi> is a title of Sin, II Raw. 48, 33, and
CT. 24, 30, 5.</note> <hi rend='italic'>dumugu</hi> [...]</l>
<l>8. Mama the princely son ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-mar-(ki)-ra-ge
gú</hi>[...]</l>
<l>9. Ninmar ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>azag dāg-zagin
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>giš</hi>má-gal-gal-la bal-[...]</hi></l>
<l>10. The holy one who lapis lazuli in great ships ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>nin nig-ga-šù igi-[...]-ti-la a azag pi-el</hi> ...</l>
<l>11. The queen ... humiliates ...</l>
</lg>

<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>nin-e KA.? gim NE-a im-da-ra?</hi></l>
<l>12. The queen ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>ki lagaš-(ki) nim-ki šu-ni-a im-ma-ši-in-gí</hi></l>
<l>13. The land of Lagash he abandoned unto the hand of Elam.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>ud-bi-a nin-e ... ud-da-ni sá-nam-ga<note place='foot'>For
<hi rend='italic'>namga</hi> as an emphatic adverb, see <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Society of Oriental Research</hi>, I 20, Metropolitan
Syllabar, Obv. I 12-15. Variant <hi rend='italic'>nanga</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Liturgical Texts</hi>, 188, 1, 4 and
5.</note>-mu-ni-ib-dúg</hi></l>
<l>14. At that time his wrathful word verily attained the queen.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Ba-ú galu-sukal-lu-gim
ud-da-ni sá- nam-ga-mu-ni-ib-dúg</hi></l>
<l>15. His wrathful word attained unto the divine Bau even as a messenger.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>me-li-e-a ud-dé šu-ni-a im-ma-ši-in-gí</hi></l>
<l>16. Woe is me, the spirit of wrath into her hand he entrusted.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>ud uru gul-gul-e šu-ni-a im-ma-ši-in-gí</hi></l>
<l>17. The spirit of wrath that destroys the city into her hand he entrusted.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>ud é gul-gul-e šu-ni-a im-ma-ši-in-gí</hi></l>
<l>18. The spirit of wrath that destroys the temple into her hand he entrusted.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>[uru?]
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Dumu-zi-abzu-ge-ta ki nir-ša-ki-ba-ge
im<note place='foot'>The scribe has written <hi rend='italic'>im</hi>
twice.</note>-ma ba-an-teg<note place='foot'>Cf. SBP. 4, 6.</note></hi></l>
<l>19. In the city(?) of Tammuz of the sea, the place of
<hi rend='italic'>wailing</hi> ... terror it caused.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. ... <hi rend='italic'>nir-šag-(ki) uru nam-šibir-ka
ni-ḳar-ḳar-ge izi-ba-ab-dúg</hi></l>
<l>20. The city ... <hi rend='italic'>nirsag</hi>, city of ... with fire it consumed.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. ... <hi rend='italic'>uru(?)-ni Ninā-(ki)-a kur-ri
ba-ab-gar<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>gar</hi> is employed
as a variant of <hi rend='italic'>kar</hi>, see <hi rend='italic'>Sum. Gr.</hi>
223. For <hi rend='italic'>gar</hi> in this sense, note
<hi rend='italic'>gar</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>šaḫātu</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>nasāḫu</hi> in the syllabars. See also SBP. 198,
14 and note 15. The same sense of <hi rend='italic'>gar</hi> will be found
in Gudea, Cyl. A 6, 16; 7, 14; St. B 9, 16; Cyl. A 12, 25.</note></hi></l>
<l>21. ... of her city Ninā it seized away to the mountains.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>[Si]rar<note place='foot'>The third sign of
this ideogram is clearly <hi rend='italic'>UNU</hi> not
<hi rend='italic'>NINA</hi> on the tablet. For the ideogram
see SBP. 284, 6.</note>-(ki) ki-dúr kenag-gà-ni ģul-gál-e ba-ab-šub</hi></l>
<l>22. Sirar her beloved habitation an evil one has overthrown.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'>[a uru]-gul-la é-gul-la-mu
gíg-ga-bi<note place='foot'>For the adverbial force of
<hi rend='italic'>bi</hi> see <hi rend='italic'>Sum. Gr.</hi> § 72.</note> im-me</hi></l>
<l>23. How long? my destroyed city, my destroyed temple, sadly I wail.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>[gè-pàr]<note place='foot'>Restored from
<hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Liturgical Texts</hi>, 123 31, and below line
45.</note> azag nam-en-na-ba šu-ba-e-lá-lal</hi></l>
<l>24. Of the holy <q>Dark Chamber</q> the priestly rites are suspended.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>[en]-bi gè-pàr-ta ba-da-an-ḳar
ki-erim-e ba-ab-KA(du)<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>KA</hi> with
value <hi rend='italic'>du</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>alāku</hi> occurs
here for the first time. Variant has <hi rend='italic'>du</hi> (line 33). This
text supplies two more signs and makes possible a better translation.</note></hi></l>
<l>25. Its high priest from the <q>Dark Chamber</q>
has been taken and unto the land of the foe has gone.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. ... <hi rend='italic'>KU-si-na
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nannar-ka da-dugud ba-ši-in-du</hi></l>
<l>26.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. ... <hi rend='italic'>gan kaskal-gid
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nannar-ka tùr-dugud</hi> ...</l>
<l>27.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28. ... <hi rend='italic'>ḳar-ra-gim íb-ri ba-ra</hi>- ...</l>
<l>28.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29. ... <hi rend='italic'>gim íb-ri ba-an-de
i-im-gul-gul-lu-ne<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Babylonian Liturgies</hi>,
No. 78, 3.</note></hi></l>
<l>29. ... they destroyed.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>30. ... <hi rend='italic'>azag-ga-bi
im-zí-ir-zí-ri<note place='foot'>Cf. PBS. XII No. 6 Obv. 11.</note>-e-ne ...
-e-ne</hi></l>
<l>30. Of the ... its holy ... they shattered and ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31. <hi rend='italic'>[a uru-gul]-la é-gul-la-mu gíg-ga-bi im-me</hi></l>
<l>31. How long? oh my destroyed city and my destroyed temple, sadly I wail.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32. <hi rend='italic'>[gè-pàr] azag nam-en-na-ba šu-ba-e-lá-lal</hi></l>
<l>32. Of the holy <q>Dark Chamber</q> the priestly rites are suspended.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33. <hi rend='italic'>[en]-bi gè-pàr-ta ba-da-an-ḳar ki-erim-e ba- ab- du</hi></l>
<l>33. Its high priest from the <q>Dark Chamber</q>
has been taken and unto the land of the foe has gone.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>34. ... <hi rend='italic'>gid-da-bi[...]a-nir ba-an-da-di</hi></l>
<l>34.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>35. ... <hi rend='italic'>-bi nu gud-du sag me-te-a-áš li-be-íb-gál</hi></l>
<l>35.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>36. ... <hi rend='italic'>KA íb-bi ba-ra-an-kád<note place='foot'>Identification
uncertain.</note></hi></l>
<l>36.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>37. ... <hi rend='italic'>a ... a-ri-a-e ba-da-ab-lal</hi></l>
<l>37. ... has bound with him(?)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>38. ... <hi rend='italic'>ka lù-erím-e ba-an</hi>-?</l>
<l>38. The ... of the ... the foe has ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>39. ... <hi rend='italic'>-da(?)-ab-ag</hi></l>
<l>39.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>40. <hi rend='italic'>é ... -sug-ga ba-an-dū</hi></l>
<l>40.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>

<lg>
<l>41. <hi rend='italic'>ki ... LU a-ri tùr-dugud-gim ba-gul</hi></l>
<l>41. ... like a ruined cattle stall has been destroyed.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>42. <hi rend='italic'>dingir Nin [...] mà [...] gĭr kúr ba-ra-an-ku</hi></l>
<l>42. As for the goddess Nin ... her ... the foe has set his foot.<note place='foot'>The
line is parallel to PBS. X 122, 13.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>43. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-lí-ga-ge im ...
na er-ni-šéš-šéš</hi></l>
<l>43. Ninliga ... weeps bitterly.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>44. <hi rend='italic'>a uru-gul-la é-gul-la-mu gíg-ga-bi im-me</hi></l>
<l>44. How long? oh my destroyed city and my destroyed temple, sadly I wail.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>45. <hi rend='italic'>gè-pàr-azag
nam-en-na-ba<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>nam-en-na</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>enûtu</hi>, priesthood.</note> šu-ba-e-lá-[lal]</hi></l>
<l>45. Of the holy <q>Dark Chamber</q> the priestly rites are suspended.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>46. <hi rend='italic'>en-bi gè-pàr-ta ba-[da-an-ḳar ki-erim-e ba-ab-KA(du)]</hi></l>
<l>46. Its high priest from the <q>Dark Chamber</q>
has been taken and unto the land of the foe has gone.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>47. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-a-zu-ge</hi> ...</l>
<l>47. Ninazu<note place='foot'>A title of Nergal.</note> ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>48. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-ģar-sag</hi> ...</l>
<l>48. Ninharsag ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>49. <hi rend='italic'>tu-(ģu)-gim</hi> ...</l>
<l>49. Like a dove ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>50. <hi rend='italic'>a uru-gul-la é-gul-la-mu gíg-ga-bi im-me</hi></l>
<l>50. How long? oh my destroyed city and my destroyed temple, sadly I wail.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>...</l>
<l>...<note place='foot'>About four
lines are broken away to the end of the tablet.</note></l>
</lg>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lamentation to Innini on the Sorrows of Erech. 13859 (Poebel No. 26)</head>

<p>
This well preserved single column tablet is published by
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Poebel</hi> in PBS. V 26. The composition reflects the standard
theological ideas found in the canonical psalms and liturgies.
The mother goddess Innini is represented as a divine mother
wailing for the misery of her city and her people. The calamity
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
consists in the pillage of the city and its holy places by a foreign
invader, who is repeatedly compared to an ox. Like the ordinary
psalms of public service the singers abruptly introduce the
goddess speaking in the first person as in lines 16; 18-20; 33-4.
But the lamentation does not have refrains and at the end the
style approaches nearly that of a prayer. The tablet also bears
no liturgical note at the end. For these reasons and because of
the general impression which the lines leave with the present
interpreter, he classifies this text as the product of a scholastic
liturgist of the Ur or Isin period whose work was not incorporated
into the corpus of the official breviary.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Obverse</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>zabar aga-[zu?] im-gūr-gūr-ri</hi></l>
<l>1. Oh pure one thy(?) crown overawes.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>til-igi-da<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>igi-da</hi>
occurs also in the title of Sin, <hi rend='italic'>igi-da-gál</hi>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, KL., No. 1 Obv. I 3 and 6. The
most natural interpretation is to regard <hi rend='italic'>da</hi> as
a variant of <hi rend='italic'>du</hi>, hence <q>to go before.</q></note>-zu
... im-bi-bi-ri</hi></l>
<l>2. Thy proceeding arrow scatters the....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>zíd<note place='foot'>Written <hi rend='italic'>túg</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>gu-šig</hi> is a kind of plant, on a tablet
of the Tello Collection in Constantinople,
MIO. 7086. For the meal of the <hi rend='italic'>gu-šig</hi> see
also CT. X 20, II 33 and <hi rend='smallcaps'>Reisner</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Templeurkunden</hi>,
128 Col. III.</note>-gu-šig suģur-sū-lal (ģa)-da ... -kùr</hi>....</l>
<l>3. Meal of the ... bean to the beared skate-fish thou givest to eat.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>eg ģa sĭg eg-eg ģa sŭ-lum-ma-gim im-bul-</hi>[...]&mdash;</l>
<l>4. She that gives fish to the stream, in the streams fish (as numerous) as
dates she causes to dart about.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>gud-dam ra e-sir unug-(ki)-ga-ge šár-ám
mu-na-ab(?)- ... uš</hi></l>
<l>5. Rushing like an ox in the street of Erech like a multitude(?) he
followed<note place='foot'>Restored from line 14. Here begins the
rehearsal of the woes of Erech.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>šár-ra giš-KU-A<note place='foot'>Cf. also CT. 15,
19 Rev. 2 where a place word is also expected.</note> mu-na-an-dúr-ru-ne-eš</hi></l>
<l>6. Multitudinously in the habitations they dwelled.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>šattam-a-ni lugal gab-gál<note place='foot'>Cf. Gudea,
St. B 9, 27.</note> ki-gub-bu-ne ba-ra-è</hi></l>
<l>7. Her precentor,<note place='foot'>Semitic <hi rend='italic'>šattamma</hi>
a title employed in later times apparently in a secular sense. Originally
it has a sacred meaning and probably denoted a musical director who was also a priest. The
application of a priestly title to the king is in accord with his royal
prerogatives.</note> the defender king, whither they go, went up.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>ugnim-e igi-im- ma- an- sĭg</hi></l>
<l>8. The hosts of peoples she beholds.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>nar-e li-du-a šu-i-ni-in-gí ŭb<note place='foot'>The sign
is Br. 8899.</note> šu-na be-in-šub</hi></l>
<l>9. The singer refuses to chant and from his hand has thrown the drum.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>ni<note place='foot'>For <hi rend='italic'>ni</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>nu</hi>, see SBP. 138, 22, <hi rend='italic'>ni-kuš-ù</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>nu-kuš-ù</hi>; SBH. 70, 3 = 131, 48. Read
<hi rend='italic'>li</hi>?</note>-nag-a-zu  ni-nag-a-zu</hi></l>
<l>10. Thou drinkest not; thou drinkest not.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>a<note place='foot'>Text <hi rend='italic'>GAR!</hi></note>
nu-e-nag amaš-zu um-mi-ni-nag</hi></l>
<l>11. Water thou drinkest not, but thy sheepfolds drink.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>ni-nag-a-zu  ni-nag-a-zu</hi></l>
<l>12. Thou drinkest not; thou drinkest not.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>kaš nu-e-nag ùš<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>BAD</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>kidinu</hi>, has the value <hi rend='italic'>uš</hi>; cf.
<hi rend='italic'>uš-sa</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>kuddinu</hi>, Br. 5061.</note>-zu
um-mu-ni-nag</hi></l>
<l>13. Beer thou drinkest not, but thy protégés drink.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>gud-dam e<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>e</hi> is
here interpreted as a phonetic variant of <hi rend='italic'>UD-DU</hi>. Cf.
also <hi rend='italic'>e-dam</hi> in SBP. 118, 39.</note> e-sir unug-(ki)-ga-ge
šár-ám ma-ra-mi-ù-uš</hi></l>
<l>14. Like an ox going forth in the streets of Erech like a multitude(?) he pursues
thee.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>šar-ra-ám giš-KU-A ma-ra-dúr-ru-ne-eš</hi></l>
<l>15. In multitudes they have taken up their abodes in the habitations.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>mèn<note place='foot'>This is the
first example of this form employed as subject.</note>
a-na-ag-en sal-e mà-a ma-an-dúg-ga sal-un-ne<note place='foot'>The text is
difficult. <hi rend='italic'>UN</hi> is certain but the sign
<hi rend='italic'>SAL</hi> is not clear on the tablet.</note> mèn-ne-en</hi></l>
<l>16. As for me what shall I do? I who have bestowed care.
A sacred devotee I am.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>gud-dam e ib-tag-ra be-in-ra
ni-zu<note place='foot'>Text <hi rend='italic'>SU</hi>.</note> e-ne-ib-uš</hi></l>
<l>17. Coming forth like an ox, <hi rend='italic'>hastening in
destructive fury</hi> he came; even thee thyself he pursued.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>šar-úr á nam-ur-sag-gà-mu šu-nu-um-ma-ti</hi></l>
<l>18. The <hi rend='italic'>šar-ur</hi> weapon, arm of my heroic power I
have taken not in my hand.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>é ģallab-mà a-gil-zu<note place='foot'>Phonetic variant of
<hi rend='italic'>gil-sa</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>sukuttu</hi>. The prefix
<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> is difficult and probably the noun augment,
see <hi rend='italic'>Sum. Gr.</hi> § 148. The vowel <hi rend='italic'>a</hi>
seems to possess another sense in SBP. 284, 1.</note>-bi dal-la
mi-ni-gí<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>gí</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>piḫû</hi>,
confine, RA. 9, 77 I, 10; note also <hi rend='italic'>é-a-ám gí</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>ina bîti piḫû</hi>, K. 41 Col. II 12.</note></hi></l>
<l>19. Of my temple in Hallab its treasures he has hidden far away.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. <hi rend='italic'>giš-dal é-an-na pa-ba mi-ni-in-kud</hi></l>
<l>20. Of the <hi rend='italic'>tallu</hi><note place='foot'>Part of
the door; see VAB. IV Index.</note> of
Eanna its <hi rend='italic'>PA</hi> he broke off.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>gud-dam sil-šú im-ma-na-ra-è</hi></l>
<l>21. Like an ox he came up against thee on the highways.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>gud-dam e e-sir unu-(ki)-ga-ge šár-ra mu-ni-in-gaz</hi></l>
<l>22. Like an ox going forth in the streets of Erech he slaughtered multitudes(?).</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'>šár-ra giš-KU-A-a-na mu-ni-in-dīg</hi></l>
<l>23. Multitudes in their habitations he caused to die.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>giš-ig ká-gal-la im-ma-an-gŭr-gŭr</hi></l>
<l>24. The doors of the city gate he shattered.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>a-tuģ<note place='foot'>Variant of
<hi rend='italic'>á-taģ</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>rêṣu</hi>. The final
<hi rend='italic'>ka</hi> is for the emphatic <hi rend='italic'>ge</hi> in the
status obliquus (<hi rend='italic'>ga</hi>).
This emphatic particle is here attached to the object
which is not a construct formation, but the
choice of <hi rend='italic'>ka</hi> for <hi rend='italic'>ge</hi>
is probably influenced by the principle of employing the oblique case of the
construct when the noun in question is in the accusative; see
<hi rend='italic'>Sum. Gr.</hi> § 135. <q>Defender</q> refers
to Tammuz.</note>-na-ka ... im-ma-an-è</hi></l>
<l>25. Her defender he caused to go forth,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. <hi rend='italic'>šu-PEŠ<note place='foot'>The same title in PBS.
V 2 Obv. II 23, <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Dumu-zi
šu-PEŠ</hi>. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Poebel</hi> interpreted this as a
variant of <hi rend='italic'>šu-ģa</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>ba'iru</hi>, fisherman,
and his suggestion is probably correct. We have, however,
to consider the possibility of a confusion with <hi rend='italic'>kam</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>ukkušu</hi>, the afflicted, SAI. 5082.</note>
dumu šu-PEŠ <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Innini-ge</hi></l>
<l>26. The fisherman, the son fisherman of Innini.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. <hi rend='italic'>šen-urudu  mu-na-an-bar-ri-ia-dúg<note place='foot'>The rise
of the semi-vowel <hi rend='italic'>i</hi> between the vowels
<hi rend='italic'>a-a</hi> occurs under similar circumstances in
<hi rend='italic'>igi-ģe-ni-ib-ila-ia-dúg</hi>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Radau</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Miscellaneous Texts</hi>,
No. 4, 5. See also <hi rend='italic'>Sum. Gr.</hi> § 38, 2. The
form above arose from <hi rend='italic'>bar-ri-a-a-dúg</hi>. The
prefixed element <hi rend='italic'>dúg</hi> falls under § 153 of the Grammar.
<hi rend='italic'>bar</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>sapāḫu</hi> is a variant
<hi rend='italic'>par</hi>, to spread out, scatter.</note></hi></l>
<l>27. The copper vessels he scattered.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28. <hi rend='italic'>gud-dam ra ... im-ma-an-ra-aģ</hi></l>
<l>28. Hastening like an ox he has wrought demolition.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29. <hi rend='italic'>gud-dam e
er-im-ma-an-šub<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>šub</hi>, to let fall,
<hi rend='italic'>hence tabāku</hi>, to pour out. Heretofore this meaning
of <hi rend='italic'>šub</hi> was known only
from the forms <hi rend='italic'>al-šù-šù-be</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>ittanatbak</hi>, SBH. No. 62, 15, and forms
cited by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Meissner</hi>, SAI. 8345.
See also <hi rend='italic'>šu from šub</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>,
8334 and <hi rend='italic'>al-šù-šù-be</hi>, MVAG, 1913 pt. 2 p. 49, 16.</note>
sîg-sîg-ni-mà-mal<note place='foot'>The same passage occurs in Ni.
13856 II 13. <hi rend='italic'>sîg-sîg</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>šaḳummatu</hi>,
variant of <hi rend='italic'>sīg-sīg</hi>.</note></hi></l>
<l>29. Coming forth like an ox tears he has caused to fall and misery he caused to be.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>

<lg>
<l>30. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Innini
zig<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>zig</hi> is probably phonetic
for <hi rend='italic'>šeg</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>magāru</hi>, see
<hi rend='italic'>Sum. Gr.</hi> 258,
<hi rend='italic'>zig<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>7</hi></hi>.</note>-mu
sum-ma-ab</hi></l>
<l>30. Oh Innini, grant me favor.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31. <hi rend='italic'>gud kur-ra ga-mu-ra-ab-sum tùr-zu
ga-mu-ra-ah-lu<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>lu</hi> from
<hi rend='italic'>lum</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>dašû</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>dišû</hi>,
passim.</note></hi></l>
<l>31. Oxen of the mountains I will give thee; thy stables I will enrich for thee.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32. <hi rend='italic'>udu ... kur-ra ... ga-mu-ra-ab-sum
amaš-zu ga-mu-ra-ab-lu</hi></l>
<l>32. Sheep of the mountains I will give thee; thy sheepfolds I will enrich for thee.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33. <hi rend='italic'>azag <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Innini-ge
mu-na-ni-íb-gí-gí<note place='foot'>Cf. also PBS. V 25 I 15; II
13 <hi rend='italic'>mu-na-ni-ib-gí-gí</hi>.</note></hi></l>
<l>33. Holy Innini replied:&mdash;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>34. <hi rend='italic'>a-šag ģallab-(ki)-a dúr-gar be-e-gar-ra
e-ku<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>eku</hi> from
<hi rend='italic'>uku</hi> by dissimilation of vowels. See also
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reisner</hi>, SBH. 77, 17.</note>
ni-nad-ba</hi></l>
<l>34. <q>In the plains of Hallab thou shalt make thy abode where the people
repose.</q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>35. <hi rend='italic'>ama-ba<note place='foot'>For <hi rend='italic'>ama</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>ummatu</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>ummanātu</hi>, see
<hi rend='italic'>Sum. Gr.</hi> 202,
<hi rend='italic'>ama</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> and
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Weidner</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der
Babylonischen Astronomie</hi>, p. 86, 4.</note> ...
gĭr(?) ... ģa-ra-ab-túg-e balag-al<note place='foot'>See, for
the musical instrument <hi rend='italic'>AL</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Liturgical
Texts</hi>, Index, p. 221.</note> ģu-mu-ra-ab-bi</hi></l>
<l>35. May their hosts <hi rend='italic'>attend</hi>(?) thee and proclaim to
thee on lyre and harp(?)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>36. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Innini
nam-ur-sag-[zu]<note place='foot'>Text omits <hi rend='italic'>zu</hi>, which
is not on the tablet.</note> ga-ám-dúg</hi></l>
<l>36. Oh Innini, I will rehearse thy valor.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>37. <hi rend='italic'>zag-sal-zu ...  dug-ga-ám</hi></l>
<l>37. It is good to sing thy praise.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Liturgical Hymn to Sin. 8097 (No. 7)</head>

<p>
This liturgical composition consists of two melodies each
designated by the rubric <hi rend='italic'>sagarram</hi>,
<q>It is a <hi rend='italic'>sagar</hi>.</q> The entire
service is sung to the <hi rend='italic'>tigû</hi>, a kind of flute. In the first melody
of fifteen lines the choir chant the glory of the moon god and
his city Ur. The second melody of twenty-four lines is apparently
an address of the earth god Enlil to his son the moon god.
This melody must remain obscure as long as the recurring
liturgical phrase <hi rend='italic'>áb-mu-ba-ši-in-dib</hi> is unexplained.
</p>

<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>

<lg>
<l>....</l>
<l>....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. [...]<hi rend='italic'>-ni éš uri-ki mu-šú ba-an-sá</hi></l>
<l>5. His city(?) the abode of Ur as a name he named.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>en ud-sud-du-ge uru-ni-ta</hi></l>
<l>6. As lord unto eternal days in his city,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Zu-en-e
kidur<note place='foot'>Written <hi rend='italic'>KU-KI</hi> Cf. also CT. 16,
44, 80 <hi rend='italic'>KU-KI-gar-ra-bi</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>
ina ašābi-šu</hi>.</note> ba-ni-in-gar</hi></l>
<l>7. The god Sin he<note place='foot'>Enlil.</note> caused to abide.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>uri-ki uru šag-gi-pad-da-na</hi></l>
<l>8. In Ur the city which his heart has chosen</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>è gud-gim ub-im-me</hi></l>
<l>9. The temple like a strong bull calls unto the regions(?)<note place='foot'>A reading
<hi rend='italic'>ár-im-me</hi>, <q>it is glorified,</q> suggests itself.
Cf. SBH. 93, 1.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>lugal-mu ... sá-rin-na-ni<note place='foot'>Cf. TSA. 31
Obv. II.</note></hi></l>
<l>10. Of my king, may his net(?)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>ki-maģ ki-kal-kal ģe-en-na-nam-ma-ám</hi></l>
<l>11. Be upon tomb and ruins.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Zu-en-e
uru kenag-gà-ni</hi></l>
<l>12. Of Sin, may his beloved city,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>eš uri-(ki) me-azag-azag-ga</hi>....</l>
<l>13. The dwelling-place Ur, with holy decrees a city....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>lugal-mu    bara</hi>....</l>
<l>14. Of my king may his chapel....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. [...]<hi rend='italic'>-e nin [...] gar-ra</hi>....</l>
<l>15. ....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>sa-  [gar-]  ra- ám<note place='foot'>See PBS. Vol. XII
12.</note></hi></l>
<l>16. It is a <hi rend='italic'>sagar</hi> melody.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>e<note place='foot'>Cf. SBP. 295, 17.</note>
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nannar [ áb -] zu me-a mu-'u-lu en
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Áš-ìm-ür</hi></l>
<l>17. Hail! Nannar, of the flocks(?) thou art ruler, lord Ašimur.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>uru igi-ila éš šag [-gál ul- ]
ti<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>ul-ti</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>ḫubuṣu</hi>,
<q>the lusty man,</q> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Poebel</hi>, PBS. V
136 V 13, with which compare n. pra.
<hi rend='italic'>Ḫubbuṣu</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ḫubbuṣtu</hi>, in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Holma</hi>, <q>Personal Names of the Form
<hi rend='italic'>fu ul</hi>,</q> p. 50. Note also <hi rend='italic'>ul-ti-a</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>ḫābṣatum</hi>, PBS. V <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>
l. 12. The hymn to Sin, SBP. 296, contains in line 14 the same
phrase.</note>-a-ni-mà</hi></l>
<l>19. In my city of the lifting of the eyes, the home of his own abode, which
is his fulness of luxury,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. <hi rend='italic'>šuruppak-gim [nam-ģar-]-gud-e<note place='foot'>Text not
entirely certain. If correctly read the signs <hi rend='italic'>ḪAR-GUD</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>kabattu</hi> must be read in
SBP. 48, 45 after the variant SBH. 3, 10.</note> gál-la-bi</hi></l>
<l>20. Whose design is like Šuruppak,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. ...<hi rend='italic'>-e.... áb-mu-ba-ši-in-dib</hi></l>
<l>21. ....I have caused him to be a shepherd(?)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>[e dumu]
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e.</hi></hi><hi rend='italic'>En-lil-lá
kalama me-a</hi> <hi rend='italic'>mu-'u-lu en
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Áš-ìm-ür</hi></l>
<l>22. [Hail! son] of Enlil, in the Land he is ruler, lord Ašimur.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>[uru igi-] ila éš-šag-gál ul-[ti]-a-ni-mà</hi></l>
<l>24. Into my city of the lifting of the eyes, the home of his own abode, which
is his fulness of luxury,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>[šuruppak]-gim nam-ģar-gud-[e] gál-la-bi</hi></l>
<l>25. Whose design is like Šuruppak,</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reverse</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>[... áb-mu-ba-] ši-in-dib</hi></l>
<l>1. [...] I have caused him to be a shepherd(?)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>[dumu-sag <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-lil-lá
kalama me-a] mu-'u-lu en <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Áš-ìm-ür</hi></l>
<l>2. [First son of Enlil, in the Land he is] ruler, lord Ašimur,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>[ud-]-dug-ga [ki-gar-ra mu-šú ga]-sá-a</hi></l>
<l>4. [<q>He that institutes battle</q> ] as a name I name.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Áš-ìm-[ür
šag]-gi-pad-da-mu</hi></l>
<l>5. Ašimur the ... whom my heart has chosen,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>é-mud-[kur-ra-mu]<note place='foot'>Restored from line
10. The only previous occurrence of this name is in <hi rend='smallcaps'>Smith's</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Miscellaneous
Texts</hi>, 11, 1 which has <hi rend='italic'>RI</hi> not
<hi rend='italic'>MU</hi>. The end of the name is broken in BL. No, 27. Perhaps
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Smith</hi> copied the sign wrongly.</note>
áb-mu-ba-ši-in-dib</hi></l>
<l>6. In Emudkurramu I caused to be a shepherd(?).</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>dumu-sag <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-lil-lá
kalama me-a mu-'u-lu</hi></l>
<l>7. First son of Enlil, in the Land he is ruler.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>ud-dug-ga<note place='foot'>Pronounced
<hi rend='italic'>udugga</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>ṣaltu</hi>.</note>-ki-gar-ra
mu-[šú] ga-sá-a</hi></l>
<l>8. <q>He that institutes battle</q> as a name I name.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Áš-ìm-ür me-en
ki [šag]-gi-pad-da-mu</hi></l>
<l>9. Ašimur thou art; where my heart has chosen,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>é-mud-kur-ra-mu áb-[mu-ba]-ši-in-  dib</hi></l>
<l>10. In Emudkurramu I have caused thee to be a shepherd(?).</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11-12. <hi rend='italic'>lugal tùr-azag-ga áb-zu me-a mu-'u-lu šul-pa
munsub-nun-na</hi></l>
<l>11-12. Lord of the clean sheepfolds, ruler of the flocks is he, the glorious(?) hero,
far famed shepherd.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>šag-túm-ma bara ša mu-un-dū eš-e uri-(ki)-mu-[šú]</hi></l>
<l>13. In the meadow a sanctuary I have built; in the abode of my city Ur,</l>
</lg>

<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>é-šág-nam-sar kur Dilmun-na nam</hi></l>
<l>14. In the temple Šagnamsar<note place='foot'>The name
as transliterated means <hi rend='italic'>mudammiḳ musarrê</hi>, <q>Temple
of the benefactor of writing.</q>
In line 15 its holy reed is mentioned, a mythical stylus symbolic of the god of wisdom,
Enki, according to SAK. 6 h.</note> which is in the mount of Dilmun,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>é-gi-azag-bi-a áb mu-ba-ši-in-dib</hi></l>
<l>15. In the temple of the holy stylus a shepherd I caused him to be(?)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>dumu-sag <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-lil-lá
kalama me-a mu-'u-lu šul-pa munsub nun-na</hi></l>
<l>16. First son of Enlil, in the Land he is ruler, glorious(?) hero, far famed
shepherd.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>šag-túm-ma bara ša-mu-un-dū éš-e uri-ki-mu-šú</hi></l>
<l>18. In the meadow a sanctuary I built; in the abode of my city Ur,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>é-šá-nam-sar kur Dilmun-na nam</hi></l>
<l>19. In the temple Šagnamsar which is in the mount of Dilmun,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. <hi rend='italic'>é-gi-azag-bi-a áb-mu-ba-ši-in-dib</hi></l>
<l>20. In the temple of the holy stylus a shepherd I have caused him to be(?)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>sa-gar-  ra-  ám</hi></l>
<l>21. It is a <hi rend='italic'>sagar</hi> melody.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>nar-balag<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>nar-balag</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>tigû</hi>, a kind of flute. Here the word
indicates that in the musical accompaniment
this instrument was employed. It probably denotes a specific kind of melody. Three other
musical instruments have given their names to classes of melodies,
the <hi rend='italic'>eršemma</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>balag</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>me-zí</hi>,
see SBP. page IX, and BL. page XXXVIII.</note>
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Zu-en-na</hi></l>
<l>22. Song on the flute to Sin.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lamentation on the Destruction of Ur. 7080 (No. 11)</head>

<p>
The fragment Ni. 7080 carries the right half of one of the
largest literary tablets in the Museum. Broken evenly at the
center from top to bottom the right half of this tablet preserves
part of Col. III and all of Cols. IV, V of the obverse. The reverse
correspondingly contains Cols. I, II and half of Col. III. Like
so many similar liturgical compositions of the period of Ur this
lamentation is divided into a series of <hi rend='italic'>kišubs</hi> or songs, here of
unusually great length. The third song ends at Obv. III 38;
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
its first line stood in Obv. II, which has been lost. The fourth
song began at Obv. III 42 and ends at Obv. IV 23, containing
thirty-four lines. The fifth song begins at Obv. IV 27 and ends
at Obv. V 7, containing forty-seven lines. In the following pages
will be found a translation of twenty-three lines of the end of the
fourth song which describes the wrathful word of the gods Anu
and Enlil. The fifth song, a remarkable ode to the wrathful
word of Enlil, has been translated so far as the text permits.
</p>

<p>
The sixth song begins at Obv. V 11, and probably terminated
in the broken passage at the top of Rev. I. Its length was also
unusual, having at least forty-five lines. This song was edited
on a small tablet Ni. 4584 on which the beginning and the end
of the section are preserved. It has been published as No. 10
in <hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Liturgical Texts</hi>, Vol. X of the Publications of the
Babylonian Section. Only a few lines at the commencement of
this song have been translated here. From this point onward
the language of the liturgy presents such difficulty that the
writer has been unable to offer a translation.
</p>

<p>
Section seven probably ended at the top of Rev. II and
refers throughout to the mother goddess who weeps over the
ruins of Ur. The eighth song probably began at the top of
Rev. II and ended perhaps at the top of Rev. III. It is another
doleful ode to the weeping mother and many of its lines are
clear and translatable. The entire song is marked by sorrowful
refrains: <hi rend='italic'>me-li-e-a uru-mu nu-me-a</hi>, Oh woe is me, my city is
no more.<note place='foot'>Rev. II 22.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>a-uru-mu im-me</hi>, How long? oh my city I cry.<note place='foot'>Rev.
II 19.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>me-li-e-a uru-ta è-a-mèn</hi>, Oh woe is me, from the city I
depart.<note place='foot'>Rev. II 29.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>dingir ga-ša-an-gal-mèn é-ta è-a-mèn</hi>, Great divine queen am I,
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
from the temple I depart.<note place='foot'>Rev. II 30.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>er-gig ni-šéš-šéš</hi>, She weeps
bitterly.<note place='foot'>Rev. II 37:41. Cf. <hi rend='italic'>er-gig
mu-un-šéš-šéš</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, KL. 25 II 2 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
Only the ends of lines of a large part of the ninth song are
preserved in Rev. III. The tenth song probably occupied most
of the space in Rev. IV. Speculation concerning the number of
songs in the entire liturgy is limited to the number of about 11-13.
The liturgy was, therefore, extremely long, attaining to a content
of about 500 lines. We know from the single tablet variant of the
sixth song that another edition of this series existed in which
small tablets carried each a single <hi rend='italic'>kišub</hi>. A similar condition of
editorial redaction is revealed by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, KL. 200, a small
tablet which contains the twelfth song of a liturgy to the deified
king of Isin, Išme-Dagan.
</p>

<p>
The historical event referred to in this liturgy is undoubtedly
the destruction of Ur in the time of Ibi-Sin, last of the kings of the
Ur dynasty. This calamity left many traces in the temple songs
of Sumer, and the Sumerian prayer books of Nippur contain
other lamentations on the fall of Ur, written perhaps during the
Isin period. The writer has already published a single column
tablet which rehearses the same catastrophe, mentioning Ibi-Sin
himself and naming the Elamites as his captors.<note place='foot'>See
<hi rend='italic'>Historical and Religious Texts</hi> 5-8.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Obverse IV</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>an-ni e-ne-em-bi ba-ra-mu-un-gur</hi></l>
<l>1. Anu may prevent his word.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil-e
ni<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>nig</hi> to <hi rend='italic'>ni</hi>.</note>-šág
ģe-ám-bi</hi></l>
<l>2. Enlil may order kindness.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. ... <hi rend='italic'>šag-mu ba-ra-be-in-šed-di</hi></l>
<l>3. And may my heart be at peace from sorrow.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>

<lg>
<l>4. [...-]<hi rend='italic'>su-ud arad-na sag ki-ba-da-ab-gál-la</hi></l>
<l>4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. [    ]-<hi rend='italic'>nae-ne-em-súr-ragur-da-bi</hi></l>
<l>5. [    ] the angry word be prevented.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. [    ] <hi rend='italic'>ba-da-an-dúr-ru-ne-eš-a</hi></l>
<l>6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>ùr-ģe-im-ma-gid-gid-da  ģe-im-ma-lal-lá</hi></l>
<l>7. The foundations it has annihilated, and reduced to the misery of silence.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>an-ra a-i-ne-mà me-e ģe-im-ma-na-dúg</hi></l>
<l>8. Unto Anu I will cry my <q>how long?</q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil-ra ní-mu
šag-ne-du ģe-im-ma-ag</hi></l>
<l>9. Unto Enlil I myself will pray.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>uru-mu nam-ma-gul-lu ģe-im-me-ne-dúg</hi></l>
<l>10. <q>My city has been destroyed</q> will I tell them.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>Uri-(ki) nam-ma-gul-lu ģe-im-me-ne-dúg</hi></l>
<l>11. <q>Ur has been destroyed</q> will I tell them.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>uku-bi nam-ma-bir(?)-e ģe-im-me-ne-dúg<note place='foot'>Lines
50-54 on Col. III may be restored from lines 8-12.</note></hi></l>
<l>12. <q>Its people have been <hi rend='italic'>scattered</hi></q> will I tell them.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>an-ni e-ne-em-bi ba-ra-mu-un-gur</hi></l>
<l>13. May Anu prevent his word.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil-e ni-šág
ģe-ám-  bi</hi></l>
<l>14. May Enlil order kindness.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>šag-mu ba-ra-be-in-šed-di</hi></l>
<l>15. And may my heart be at peace from sorrow.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>uru-mu gul-gul-lu-ba-da-bi ģe-im-ma-an-?-eš</hi></l>
<l>16. My city which has been destroyed may they ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>Uri-(ki) gul-gul-lu-ba-da-bi ģe-im-ma-an-?-eš</hi></l>
<l>17. Ur which has been destroyed may they ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>uku-bi dìg gi-bil-šu ág-bi ģa-ba-an-ṫar-ri-eš</hi></l>
<l>18. Of its slain people may they decree a new
dispensation.<note place='foot'>Literally, <q>decree again their oracle.</q></note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>me-e nig-dúg-mu
mu-ne-sum-ma-gim<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>gim</hi>, emphatic
suffix.</note></hi></l>
<l>19. I will offer my meditations unto them.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. <hi rend='italic'>me-e uru-mu-da ģe-en-bi mu-un-da-lal-eš</hi></l>
<l>20. I (will say to them): <q>In my city they have despised the splendor.</q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>Uri-(ki) mu-durun-da ģe-en-bi mu-(un)-da-lal-e-eš</hi></l>
<l>21. <q>In Ur the city of homes they have despised the splendor.</q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>an-ni [dúg-ga-ni ģur] nu-kúr-ru-dam</hi></l>
<l>22. Anu whose words in this manner change not.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi> Mu-ul-lil-e
eṇim-bi è-a-ni ... e-dam</hi></l>
<l>23. Enlil the going forth of whose word....</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>ki-šub-gú 4-kam-ma-ám</hi></l>
<l>24. It is the fourth song.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>uru-ni ba-da-gul-ám me-ni ba-da-kúr-am</hi></l>
<l>25. Her city has been destroyed, her ordinances have been changed.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. <hi rend='italic'>giš-gí-  gál-bi-  im</hi></l>
<l>26. This is its antiphon.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>27. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi> En-lil-li ud-de
gù-ba-an-de</hi></l>
<l>27. Enlil utters the spirit of wrath</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28. <hi rend='italic'>uku-e še-ám-šá</hi></l>
<l>28. and the people wail.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29. <hi rend='italic'>ud ģe-gál-la kalaṃa-da ba-da-an-ḳar</hi></l>
<l>29. The spirit of wrath prosperity from the Land has destroyed</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>30. <hi rend='italic'>uku-e še-ám-šá</hi></l>
<l>30. and the people wail.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31. <hi rend='italic'>ud dug Ki-en-gi-da ba-da-an-ḳar uku-e še-ám-šá</hi></l>
<l>31. The spirit of wrath peace from Sumer has taken and the people wail.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32. <hi rend='italic'>ud ģul-gál-e á-ba-da-an-ág uku-e še-ám-šá</hi></l>
<l>32. He has sent the evil spirit of wrath and the people wail.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33. <hi rend='italic'>ḳin-gal-ud-da ud-da-gub-ba šu-na im-ma-an-sĭg</hi></l>
<l>33. The <q>Messenger of Wrath,</q> the <q>Assisting Spirit</q> into
its hand he entrusted.<note place='foot'>We meet here for the first
time with two avenging angels or genii who attend the Word in its
execution of the wrath of god. <hi rend='italic'>Ḳingaludda</hi>
is mentioned as one of four evil spirits <hi rend='italic'>ilu limmu</hi> in
CT. 25, 22, 44. He is mentioned with the Zû bird and the demon
<hi rend='italic'>šêdu</hi> as appearing in dream
omens, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Boissier</hi>, DA. 207, 34. See
also <hi rend='smallcaps'>Boissier</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Choix</hi>, II
53, 4. On <hi rend='italic'>uddugub</hi> as a title of
kings see BE. 31, 22 n. 9.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>34. <hi rend='italic'>ud kalam-tíl-tíl-e gù-ba-an-de uku-e še-ám-šá</hi></l>
<l>34. He has uttered the spirit of wrath which exterminates the Land and the people
wail.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>35. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-lil-li
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Gi-bil á-taģ-a ki-mu-na-ni-in</hi>-[    ]</l>
<l>35. Enlil <hi rend='italic'>has sent</hi> Gibil as its helper.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>36. <hi rend='italic'>ud-gal an-na-ge gù-ba-an-de uku-e še-ám-šá</hi></l>
<l>36. The great spirit of Heaven has been uttered and the people wail.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>37. <hi rend='italic'>ud-gal-e<note place='foot'>The <hi rend='italic'>ud-gal</hi>
is regarded as plural = <hi rend='italic'>ûmu rabûti</hi> and identified
with the evil spirits of incantations,
CT. 16, 22, 266 and 276. In the Epic of Creation the
<q>great spirit of wrath</q> is one of the
demons attendant upon Tiamat.</note> an-ta gù-ni-ib-im-me uku-e še-ám-šá</hi></l>
<l>37. The mighty spirit on high he commanded forth and the people wail.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>

<lg>
<l>38. <hi rend='italic'>ud kalam tíl-tíl-e azag ki</hi> ...</l>
<l>38. The spirit that annihilates the Land ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>39. <hi rend='italic'>im-ģul-e a-maģ-è-a-gim</hi> ...</l>
<l>39. The evil storm like a mounting inundation ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>40. <hi rend='italic'>giš-dúr<note place='foot'>See PBS. X 161, 13.</note>
uru-ge sag-gaz ni-ag</hi> ...</l>
<l>40. The shepherd of the city it slew ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>41. <hi rend='italic'>an-na ùr-ba? mu-un-nigin</hi> ...</l>
<l>41. Of heaven its foundation it ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>42. <hi rend='italic'>ud-da igi-ba-ne mu-un-ne-ne</hi> ...</l>
<l>42.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>43. <hi rend='italic'>bàr-bàr-ri ne-gig-edin-na tùr(?)</hi> ...</l>
<l>43.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>44. <hi rend='italic'>an-ne-bar-ám ne-gùr-gùr</hi> ...</l>
<l>44.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>45. <hi rend='italic'>an-ne é UD-UD è</hi> ...</l>
<l>45.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>46. <hi rend='italic'>kalam-ma lăg-lăg-ga</hi> ...</l>
<l>46.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(Lines 47-55 mostly illegible.)
</p>

<p>
Col. V.
</p>

<p>
(Lines 1-6 mostly illegible.)
</p>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>Uri-(ki)-ma túg-gim ba-e-gul ... gim ba-e-búr</hi></l>
<l>7. Ur like a garment thou hast destroyed, like a ... thou hast scattered.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>ki-šub-gú 5-kam-ma-ám</hi></l>
<l>8. It is the fifth song.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>ud ug(?)-ám al-[    ]uku-e še-am-šá</hi></l>
<l>9. The spirit of wrath like a <hi rend='italic'>lion</hi> ... and the people
lament.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>giš- gí- gál -bi- im</hi></l>
<l>10. This is its antiphon.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>ud-ba ud uru-da ba-da-an-gar uru-bi</hi> ...</l>
<l>11. At that time the spirit of wrath upon the city was wrought and the
city....<note place='foot'>The traces on Ni. 7080 are against
the restoration <hi rend='italic'>še-am-šá</hi>. Lines 11-19 are restored from
PBS. X No. 10.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>a-a <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nannar uru
dim-dūl-dūl-da ba-da-an-[    ]uku-e še-ám-šá</hi></l>
<l>12. Father Nannar upon the city of <hi rend='italic'>master workmen</hi> ... and
the people wail.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>ud-ba ud kalama-ta ba-da-an-kár uku-e še-ám-šá</hi></l>
<l>13. At that time the spirit of wrath <hi rend='italic'>descended</hi> upon the
Land and the people wail.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>uku-bi šika-kud-da [nu-me-a bar-ba ba-e-si]</hi></l>
<l>14. Her people without water jars sit without her in desolation</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>bád-ba gú [?<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>gĭr</hi>?
Variant <hi rend='italic'>gú-nin!</hi></note>]-nin [kaskala im-ma-an-gar-gar
uku-e še-ám-šá</hi>]</l>
<l>15. Within her ... in the ways are <hi rend='italic'>placed</hi> and the people
wail.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>ká-gal-maģ gĭr-gál-la-[ba àd-a im-ma-] an [BAD]</hi></l>
<l>16. The great city gate and the highways with the dead are <hi rend='italic'>choked
up</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>duk?-tun-sìr-gim dū-a-ba [sag-bal-e] ba-ab- gar</hi></l>
<l>17. Like a leather vessel all of her the usurper cast asunder(?)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. [    ] <hi rend='italic'>e-sir gĭr-gál-la-ba àd im-ma-an-gar-gar</hi></l>
<l>18. In her ... streets and roads corpses he <hi rend='italic'>heaped up</hi>(?)</l>
</lg>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Liturgical Hymns of the Tammuz Cult. 3656 (Myhrman No. 5)</head>

<p>
The obverse of this fine single column tablet contained a
hymn in thirty-eight lines to the departed Tammuz. It represents
the people wailing for the lord of life who now sleeps in
the lower world. Thirteen lines have been completely broken
away from the top. The reverse carried a long liturgical song
of the cult of this god in which the mother goddess is represented
wailing for her ravished lover. Songs of the weeping mother are
common enough in these wailings for Tammuz, but all other
known examples of this <hi rend='italic'>motif</hi> represent the major unmarried
type of mother goddess Innini-Ishtar wandering on earth, crying
for her departed son. The hymn on our tablet reveals in a
wholly unexpected manner the close relation between the mother
goddess Gula of Isin and Innini. It was known that both sprang
from a common source, a prehistoric unmarried goddess, but one
had hardly supposed that the liturgists went so far as to introduce
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
the married goddess of Isin in the rôle of the virgin mother
Innini. The great mother divinity of Isin, although attached in a
loose way to a male consort Ninurta, in that city retained, nevertheless,
much of her ancient unattached character. In the
standard liturgies she is almost invariably the type of Weeping
mother, whereas Innini is this type in the Tammuz liturgies.
Since Gula of Isin was the ordinary liturgical type we find the
influence of the ordinary liturgies effective in the composition
of the Tammuz hymn. It explains the extraordinary phenomenon
of the introduction of a long passage (Rev. 3-10) from one
of the wailing liturgies. And the short litany refrain lines 11-20
is obviously an imitation of numberless similar passages of the
ordinary liturgies in which the goddess wails for various temples;
here only for Nippur and Isin, since the composition was written
for the services at Nippur in the period of the Isin dynasty.
In a most gratifying manner our tablet shows how the lamentations
of the mother goddess in the canonical prayer books express
sorrows for certain concrete misfortunes and certain defined
temples and cities and find their general expression in the lamentations
for Tammuz, the representative of all human vicissitudes.
This edition has been made from my own copy. The tablet was
first published by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Myhrman</hi>, PBS. Vol. I No.
5, and by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Radau</hi>,
BE. 30 No. 2. To these copies I have been able to make only
slight additions.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hymns of the Tammuz Cult</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>KU</hi>-? [    ]</l>
<l>1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>kalag giš</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>2. Oh strong one [    ]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>me-ri kuš-ù-[zu</hi><note place='foot'>Cf. RA. 12, 37, 1.</note>
   ]</l>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>Thy</hi> weary foot [    ]</l>
</lg>

<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>á-lirum-šu<note place='foot'>So from my
copy and CT. IV 4<hi rend='italic'>b</hi> 12 = <hi rend='italic'>Babyloniaca</hi>, III
17.</note>-[kuš-ù-zu</hi> ... ]</l>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>Thy weary</hi> arms&mdash;breast&mdash;hands [    ]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>a-zu<note place='foot'>For this title of Tammuz,
see <hi rend='italic'>Tammuz and Ishtar</hi>, 34.</note>-guruš a-zu</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>5. Oh strong healer, oh ... healer [    ]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>kalag
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Da-mu-mu</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>6. Oh strong one, my Damu [    ]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>ṭu-mu ù-mu-un mu-zi-da</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>7. Oh child, lord Gišzida [    ]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>a-zu a dam ... ni-kuš-ù-a-zu</hi></l>
<l>8. Oh healer, how long husband ... wilt thou be weary?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>a-zu a ṭu-mu ... ni-kuš-ù-a-zu</hi></l>
<l>9. Oh healer, how long son ... wilt thou be weary?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>i-dé (?) ... ṭu-ru ? [na?] zu-dé</hi></l>
<l>10. When before ... thou sittest,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>kalag da-ga-ám-ma<note place='foot'>Probably for
<hi rend='italic'>dagan = puḫru</hi>, RA. 11, 144, 8. See
also <hi rend='italic'>dakan</hi>, divine abode, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Delitzsch</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Glossar</hi>, 132.</note>-ni ... zu-dé</hi></l>
<l>11. Oh strong one, when <hi rend='italic'>into</hi> his
<hi rend='italic'>assembly</hi> thou ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>a-rib<note place='foot'>Cf. SB P. 304, 13.</note>
šu-si me-ri ... a-bal-mà na-nam</hi></l>
<l>12. Alas he whose fingers and feet [<hi rend='italic'>are bound</hi>], my
irrigator<note place='foot'>Title of Tammuz as spirit of the waters, see
<hi rend='italic'>Tammuz and Ishtar</hi>, pp. 6 and 44. <hi rend='italic'>a-bal =
tābik mê</hi>, pourer of water, irrigator, is the original idea of this
ideogram. For the title <hi rend='italic'>galu-a-bal</hi>
in this sense, see CT. 13, 42, 7 ff. <hi rend='italic'>Ak-ki galu
abal</hi>, the gardener who cared for Sargon. See also
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Thureau-Dangin</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Lettres et Contrats</hi>,
No. 174, 6-8, <hi rend='italic'>galu a-bal</hi>, a kind of laborer. The later
usage of the word as libator of water for the souls of the dead, Semitic
<hi rend='italic'>näḳ mê</hi> is a strictly conventional
development, see <hi rend='italic'>Babyloniaca</hi>, VI 208.</note> is he.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>šag-zu-šú la-aģ-[la-aģ-]ģu-a-zu</hi></l>
<l>13. Because of thee she wanders far for thee.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>kalag <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Da-mu-mu
a-bal-mà na-nam</hi></l>
<l>14. My sturdy Damu, my irrigator is he.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>ama-zu mu-lu er-ri nu-kuš-ù</hi></l>
<l>15. Thy mother she of lamentation rests not.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>ama ga-ša-an tin-dib-ba túb-bi-šú nu-durun</hi></l>
<l>16. The mother, queen who gives life to the afflicted, tarries not to repose.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>ù-šub-ba-za ù-zi-ga-za sìr-ri-šú na-ri-bi</hi></l>
<l>17. In thy perdition, in thy seizure, in melodious sighing she speaks of thee.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>kalag a-rin-na-za ù(?) a-tar-ra-za sìr-ri-šú na-ri-bi</hi></l>
<l>18. Oh hero, in thy contumely, in thy removal, in melodious sighing she speaks of
thee.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>ama-ugu-mu GAR-LUL-LUL-na-mu sìr-ri-šú nu-uš
ma-gub-bi</hi></l>
<l>19. My child-bearing mother, my lamenter(?) with melodious sighing behold
she stands</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. <hi rend='italic'>kalag idim-[ma me-]en galu-kur-al</hi></l>
<l>20. Oh sturdy one, prostrate thou art, a man of the land of
wailing(?)<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>al</hi> as synonym of
<hi rend='italic'>DE</hi> (in line 21) is probably a variant
of <hi rend='italic'>ilu = nagû</hi>.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>en ... me-en galu-kur-dim<note place='foot'>Sign
<hi rend='italic'>DE</hi>.</note></hi></l>
<l>21. Oh lord, ... thou art, a man of the land of lament.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>unu-[dagal-mu] kur-idim-ma-mu</hi></l>
<l>22. In my vast chamber, in my land of misery,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'>en me-en a-ra-li ki-sag kirud-da-mu</hi></l>
<l>23. A lord am I. In Aralu, place where I am cast away,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>kalag me-en kur-ri-sud-du-šú im-ma-ab-du
me-en</hi></l>
<l>24. A laborer am I. Unto the faraway land I go.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>ud-me-e-na<note place='foot'>This line
is connected with the classical interlude
<hi rend='italic'>ma-a-bi ud-me-na-gim</hi> etc. discussed in
SBP. 185 n. 10 and BL. XLIX.</note> ni</hi>-  ?   ?</l>
<l>25. Daily(?) he [<hi rend='italic'>sorrows</hi>?]<note place='foot'>Below
the double line the figure 38, i.e. 38 lines on the obverse. Thirteen lines
have been broken from the top.</note></l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reverse</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>šă-ab-er-ri<note place='foot'>Cf.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, K.L., 25 II 42.</note>
kuš-ù-a-mu ma-a-a nad-da-[mu]</hi></l>
<l>1. I weary with heart woe, where shall I rest?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>balag-di šă-ab-er-ri kuš-ù-a-mu ma-a-a
nad-da-[mu]</hi></l>
<l>2. Oh sing to the lyre; I weary with heart woe, where shall I rest?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>ama uru-sag ga-ša-an tin-dib-ba mèn</hi></l>
<l>3. Mother of the chief city,<note place='foot'>I. e. Isin.</note>
queen who gives life to the dead am I.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>sag-ṭu-an-na ga-ša-an Ì-si-in-(ki)-na mèn</hi></l>
<l>4. First born daughter of heaven,<note place='foot'>On
this title see BL. 143.</note> queen of Isin am I.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>ṭu-mu é-a ga-ša-an-mu<note place='foot'>Probably
an error. Omitted in translation.</note>
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Gu-nu-ra</hi></l>
<l>5. Daughter of the temple, Queen Gunura.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>tum-lu-azag ama é-šăb-ba mèn</hi></l>
<l>6. Holy <hi rend='italic'>tumlu</hi> mother of Ešabba am I.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-á-nun<note
place='foot'>On this line, see the commentary in
<hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Liturgical Texts</hi> 173 note 3.</note>
ama gù-an-ni-si mèn</hi></l>
<l>7. Enanun mother of lamentation am I.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>ga-ša-an nigín-mar-ra ki-azag-ga mèn</hi></l>
<l>8. Queen of Niginmarra,<note place='foot'>Temple in Isin-Šuruppak.
Šuruppak must have been a quarter of the later and more
famous Isin. Note that this temple is assigned to
Šuruppak in <hi rend='smallcaps'>Poebel</hi>, PBS. V 157, 7. The
liturgies, however, constantly place Niginmar at Isin.</note> the holy place, am I.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>ga-ša-an áš-te<note place='foot'>I see traces
of a sign after <hi rend='italic'>te</hi>.</note> ... ga-ša-an La-ra-ak-(ki) mèn</hi></l>
<l>9. Queen of Ašte,<note place='foot'>Temple in Larak, a
quarter of Isin. See SBP. 160 n. 7.</note> queen of Larak.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>ama é-a <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Ašnan
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Azag-sud mèn</hi></l>
<l>10. Mother of the temple, Ašnan the divine
lustrator<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>azag-sug</hi>
title of the deities of lustration Ašnan, Nidaba and Gibil.</note> am I.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>šă-ab-er-ri a-še-ir-ri ma-a kuš-ù-mu</hi></l>
<l>11. Weeping and sighing where shall I find rest?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>er é-kur-ra-ge ma-a kuš-ù-mu</hi></l>
<l>12. Weeping for Ekur, where shall I repose?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>er kenur-ra-ge ma-a kuš-ù-mu</hi></l>
<l>13. Weeping for Kenur, where shall I repose?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>er dù-azag-ga-ge ma-a kuš-ù-mu</hi></l>
<l>14. Weeping for Duazagga, where shall I repose?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>er é-dīm-ma<note place='foot'>Rendered
<hi rend='italic'>bit šarru</hi>, V Raw. 16, 52, probably
a royal chapel or room in Ekur especially provided
for the king. See also SBP. 292, 14; KL. 25 I 11.</note>-ge ma-a kuš-ù-mu</hi></l>
<l>15. Weeping for the <q>House of the King,</q> where shall I repose?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>er uru-sag-gà-ge ma-a kuš-ù-mu</hi></l>
<l>16. Weeping for the chief city, where shall I repose?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>er tir-azag-ga<note place='foot'>Probably name of
a sacred park at Isin. It contained a chapel,
<hi rend='italic'>é-tir-azag-ga</hi>, KL. 25 I 12.</note>-ge ma-a kuš-ù-mu</hi></l>
<l>17. Weeping for the sacred forest, where shall I repose?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>er Ì-si-in-(ki)-na-ge ma-a kuš-ù-mu</hi></l>
<l>18. Weeping for Isin, where shall I repose?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>er é-gal-maģ-a-ge ma-a kuš-ù-mu</hi></l>
<l>19. Weeping for Egalmah, where shall I repose?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. <hi rend='italic'>er La-ra-ak-(ki)-a-ge ma-a kuš-ù-[mu ma-a na]-d-da-bi</hi></l>
<l>20. Weeping for Larak, where shall I repose, where shall he rest?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>šă-ab dam-e-mu ša-ab [tu-mu-]<note place='foot'>For
the restoration, cf. RA. 12, 34, 9.</note> mu</hi></l>
<l>21. The ravished one my husband, the ravished one, my son,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. [...] <hi rend='italic'>ki-el-la šăb mu-ud-na-mu</hi></l>
<l>22. [In ... ] the clean place, the ravished one my spouse,</l>
</lg>

<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'>ṭu-mu-tūr ṭu-[mu ... ]</hi></l>
<l>23. The little son, the ... son [...]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>ga-ša-an</hi> [...]</l>
<l>24.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>šă-ab</hi> [...]</l>
<l>25.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. <hi rend='italic'>AN-NE</hi> [...]</l>
<l>26.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. <hi rend='italic'>sukkal</hi> [...]</l>
<l>27. <note place='foot'>The edge has the figure 48
which indicates the number of lines on the reverse and left edge.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>L. E. <hi rend='italic'>a-šab-ba-ni a-ba-bar-ra-ni</hi></l>
<l>L. E. How long his ravishing? how long his absence?<note place='foot'>See
also the same idea in SBP. 312, 12 and KL. 25 II 41.</note></l>
</lg>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A Liturgy to Enlil, Series <hi rend='italic'>e-lum gud-sun</hi>
(Zimmern KL. No. 11)</head>

<p>
The history of the text of this long and intricate Enlil liturgy
elucidates in unusual manner the evolution of Sumerian prayer
books until they attained canonical and permanent form. The
earliest text of this liturgy is partially preserved on the <hi rend='italic'>Tablet
Virolleaud</hi> published in the <hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Assyriologie</hi>, Vol. XVI.
The fragment was brought to Europe in 1909 by the assyriologist
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Charles Virolleaud</hi>, having been purchased by him during his
excavations in Persia. It is light brown and varies from the center
to the edge by two inches to one inch in thickness. The fragment
is from the upper left corner of a large three(?) column tablet.
About half of the first melody is preserved on the obverse. The
reverse preserves the last two melodies. From their rubrics we
learn that the entire series contained eleven sections. This tablet
has the rubric <hi rend='italic'>ki-šub-gú</hi> after each strophe. The titular
litany<note place='foot'>Concerning the
<hi rend='italic'>titular litanies</hi>, see PBS. X 156, 173, etc.</note>
occupies as usual the next to the last place but only the opening
lines giving the <hi rend='italic'>motif</hi> and a few titles are given. The redactor
indicates the remaining titles by a rubric <q>(Recite the title) of a
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
god until they are finished.</q> The rubric is in Semitic which
shows that the redaction was done by Semitic scholars.
</p>

<p>
The series as it finally issued from the hands of the liturgists
in the Isin period was written upon a huge five(?) column tablet,
the lower half of which has been published
by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Altsumerische
Kultlieder</hi>, No. 11. Each column contained about
fifty lines. There are no <hi rend='italic'>giš-gí-gal</hi>
or antiphons after the melodies,
ten of which I have been able to restore. By borrowing
from old songs and other liturgies the redactors have greatly
increased the length of this service. At least ten songs have
been lost on Cols. III, IV of the obverse and I, II of the reverse.
</p>

<p>
The late Assyrian redaction is mentioned in the catalogue
of prayer books IV Raw. 53 I 13 and in BL. No. 103 Obv. 13.
SBH. No. 21, edited in SBP. 112-119, is tablet one of the late
Babylonian School<note place='foot'>Erroneously designated
the fourth tablet of <hi rend='italic'>ame baranara</hi> in SBP.</note>
and contains the first four songs, duplicates of the first four
on K.L. 11. SBH. No. 25, edited in SBP. 120-123,<note place='foot'>Erroneously
assigned to <hi rend='italic'>ame baranara</hi> in SBP.</note>
carries on the obverse two songs (<hi rend='italic'>e-lum di-da-ra</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>me-e ur-ri
men</hi>) found on Col. III of K.L. No. 11, Rev., or the two last
melodies before the titular litany. A fragment published by
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Meek</hi> in BA. X pt. 1, No.
11, contains the end of <hi rend='italic'>e-lum di-da-ra</hi>
and all of <hi rend='italic'>me-e ur-ri men</hi>. SBH.
25 and <hi rend='smallcaps'>Meek</hi> No. 11 belong
to the series <hi rend='italic'>e-lum di-da-ra</hi>, entered in the Assyrian catalogue,
IV Raw. 53<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> 8, and form tablet <hi rend='italic'>one</hi> of that
service.
</p>

<p>
The titular litany of the <hi rend='italic'>e-lum gud-sun</hi> series is identical
(except for some variants) with the famous titular litany of the
mother goddess series <hi rend='italic'>mu-ten NU-NUNUZ gim-ma</hi>,
tablet <hi rend='italic'>five</hi>,
edited in SBP. 149-167. Portions of the titular litany of the
Enlil series have been edited in PBS. X 155-167, see pages
163-4. The titular litany of <hi rend='italic'>ní-ma-al gù-de-de</hi> occurs at the end
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
of tablet two of that series, SBP. 24-9 = BL. 72-3. Not every
series has a theological litany of this kind, which ordinarily
comes before the <hi rend='italic'>er-šem-ma</hi>, or intercessional song at the end.
The song to the <q>word,</q> which occurs in all series, is partially
preserved on Obv. III and begins <hi rend='italic'>a-ma-ru na-nam</hi>. The indispensable
song to the weeping mother comes just before the
titular litany. This little nine-line melody <hi rend='italic'>me-e ur-ri-mèn me-e
kàs-mèn</hi> must have been a national religious song. It was copied
into another Enlil song service as we have seen. The same song
introduces tablet <hi rend='italic'>four</hi> of an Innini series of which we have only
the end of tablet <hi rend='italic'>three</hi>, K. 2759, in BL. 93 f.
</p>

<p>
Finally the reader will note that the first song <hi rend='italic'>e-lum gud-sun</hi>
of this series has been copied into one of the tablets of <hi rend='italic'>ame
baranara</hi>, SBH. No. 22 = SBP. 126 f. A fragment of some
unknown series, K. 8603 = BL. 14 also employs this song in the
body of its text.
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>e-lum gud-sun mu-zu kur-kur-šú<note place='foot'>The text
of lines 1-25 is taken from <hi rend='italic'>Tablet Virolleaud</hi>, now
<hi rend='italic'>Collection Nies.</hi> No 1315.</note></hi></l>
<l>1. Exalted one, bull that overwhelms, thy name is on the lands.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un-e<note place='foot'>SBP. 112 and
126 have <hi rend='italic'>umun</hi>, et passim.</note> kur-kur-ra    gud-sun</hi></l>
<l>2. Lord of the lands, bull that overwhelms, thy name, etc.<note place='foot'>SBH.
42 has an inserted line between II. 1-2. See SBP. 112.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un dúg-ga-zi-da    gud-sun</hi></l>
<l>3. Lord of the faithful word, bull that overwhelms, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil
a-a ka-na-ág<note place='foot'>Vars. <hi rend='italic'>nag</hi>.</note>-gà ...
gud-sun</hi></l>
<l>4. Enlil, father of the Land, bull that overwhelms, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>sib sag-gíg-ga    gud-sun</hi></l>
<l>5. Shepherd of the dark-headed people, bull that overwhelms, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>i-dé-duģ ni-te-na    gud-sun</hi></l>
<l>6. Thou of self-created vision, bull that overwhelms, etc.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>am GĬR<note place='foot'>Uncertain. Apparently REC.
225. Elsewhere in this passage always <hi rend='italic'>ṢAB</hi> which has been
read <hi rend='italic'>erin-na</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>ummāni-šu</hi>, BL. 111,
16.</note>-na sá-sá    gud-sun</hi></l>
<l>7. Wild bull who directs his hosts, bull that overwhelms, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>ù-lul-la ku-ku<note place='foot'>See
<hi rend='italic'>Yale Vocabulary</hi> 135.</note> gud-sun mu-zu kur-kur-šú</hi></l>
<l>8. Thou that sleepest the sleep of perversity, bull that overwhelms, thy name is on
the lands.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>mu-zu kur-ra mu-ma-al-la-šú an ní-bi nam-dúb</hi></l>
<l>9. When thy name is laid upon the lands the heavens tremble of themselves,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>ki ní-bi nam-sīg</hi></l>
<l>10. and the earth quakes of itself.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil e-ne-em-zu
kur-ra-ám ma-ma-al-la-šú</hi></l>
<l>11. Oh Enlil, when thy word is laid upon the lands,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>dúg-ga-zu kur-ra-ám ma-ma-al-la-šú</hi></l>
<l>12. When thy command is laid upon the lands,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>daģ-a-zu kur-ra-ám ma-ma-al-la-šú</hi></l>
<l>13. When thy <hi rend='italic'>command</hi><note place='foot'>On this
passage see PBS. X 170, 13 and Ni. 15204, 8 of this volume.</note>
is laid upon the lands,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>an ní dúb sīg<note place='foot'>Sic! Error
for <hi rend='italic'>ní-bi-dúb</hi>.</note> ki ní-bi nam-sīg</hi></l>
<l>14. The heavens tremble of themselves, the earth of itself quakes,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>ama [nu]<note place='foot'>Omitted by the
scribe. Line restored from Ni. 15204, 11.</note>-gíg-gi
ama nu-bar-ra dumu-ni mi-ni-in-gí-gí</hi></l>
<l>15. The harlot mother, the hierodule mother slays her son,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. ... <hi rend='italic'>ga-ša-an uru bar-ra-ra dumu-ni mi-ni-in-gí-gí</hi></l>
<l>16. ... queen of the city, outside the city slays her son.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. ... <hi rend='italic'>dumu-ni mi-ni-in-gí-gí</hi></l>
<l>17. ... slays her son.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>e-lum ... e-ne-em-zu-šú ... kur-ri ni-in-gí-gí</hi></l>
<l>18. Oh exalted ... at thy word ... the foreign land <hi rend='italic'>thou reducest
to the misery of silence</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil mu-lu?
A</hi> ...</l>
<l>19. Enlil lord of ...<note place='foot'>With line 19 the variant
SBH. 42 lower fragment begins.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20.    <hi rend='italic'>kur-ri ni-in-gí-[gí]</hi></l>
<l>20. the foreign land thou <hi rend='italic'>reducest to the misery of silence</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>e-lum za-e e-ne-em-zu an-e um-ma-[dúg]</hi></l>
<l>21. Oh exalted one, as for thee, thy word in heaven speak</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>an-e ib-[...]</hi></l>
<l>22. and heaven shall ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil
za-e e-ne-em-zu ki-e um-[ma-dúg]</hi></l>
<l>23. Enlil, as for thee, thy word on earth speak</l>
</lg>

<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>ki nu-um-</hi>[    ]</l>
<l>24. and earth shall not....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>dim-me-ir    a-tú-a<note place='foot'>Var. adds
<hi rend='italic'>ra</hi>.</note> um-ma-dúg</hi>....</l>
<l>25. God of libation speak [and heaven shall ... and earth shall not....]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>am an-ki am
uru zí-ba-ge um-ma-dúg</hi> [....]</l>
<l>26. Divine wild ox of heaven and earth, wild ox of the good
city<note place='foot'>The god Ea of Eridu is meant.</note> speak, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. <hi rend='italic'>ama é-maģ-a<note place='foot'>Cf. Col.
II 19. On this variant for <hi rend='italic'>dumu-maģ</hi>, see
note in <hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Liturgical Texts</hi> 163.</note>
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>[Dam-gal-nun-na-ge]</hi></l>
<l>27. Mother of the house of the famous one, Damgalnunna,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28. <hi rend='italic'>um-ma-dug</hi> [....]</l>
<l>28. speak, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Asar-lù-dug-e
[dumu uru zí-ba-ge]</hi></l>
<l>29. Marduk, son of the good city<note place='foot'>Restored from Col. II 20.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>30. <hi rend='italic'>um-ma-dúg</hi> [....]</l>
<l>30. speak, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>ìd ama uru
zí-ba-ge um-[ma dug....]</hi></l>
<l>31. River goddess, mother of the good city speak, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>A-?<note place='foot'>We
expect the sign <hi rend='italic'>EDIN</hi>
(= <hi rend='italic'>rĭ</hi>) but the traces
are clearly not those of <hi rend='italic'>EDIN</hi>.</note>-e
ga-ša-[an ab-su-ra-ka-di<note place='foot'>Col. II 23
<hi rend='italic'>ab-su-di</hi>. Here begins KL. No. 11, I, which
joins directly on to <hi rend='italic'>Tablet Virolleaud</hi>.</note>
um-ma-dug....]</hi></l>
<l>32. Zarpanit queen of ... speak, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33. <hi rend='italic'>[sukkal-zid    mu-dug-ga]-sá-a-ra um-ma<note place='foot'>This
refrain is read <hi rend='italic'>ù-um</hi> etc. on the late
variant, SBH. No. 21, Obv. lower fragment.</note></hi></l>
<l>33. Faithful messenger, called by a good name, speak, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>34. <hi rend='italic'>[ud-dé du(l)- du(l)-]dúg šu-ám mi-ib-gál</hi></l>
<l>34. [The spirit] reduces [all things] to tribute.<note place='foot'>Cf. SBP.
40, 33. Restoration uncertain. This line does not appear in SBH. 42 = SBP. 112
which has here insertions for Tašmetu and Nanā.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>35. <hi rend='italic'>te-e-ám ama-gan-ra dumu-ni
zí-em-mà-na-ad(!)-du<note place='foot'>For <hi rend='italic'>-na-ta</hi>?.
The suffixed conjugation is frequently employed in interrogations;
<hi rend='italic'>me-na gí-gí-mu</hi>, <q>When shall one restore it?,</q>
BE. 30, 12, 2. <hi rend='italic'>a-ba ku-ul-la-ba</hi>, <q>Who shall restrain?,</q>
Ni. 4610, r. 1. <hi rend='italic'>a-na an-na-ab-taģ-ni</hi>, <q>What
shall I add to thee?,</q> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Genouillac</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Drehem</hi>, 1, 12.
Variant SBP. 114, 32 <hi rend='italic'>zag-na ab-zí-em-e</hi>.</note></hi></l>
<l>35. How long shall the child-bearing mother reject her son?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>36. <hi rend='italic'>te-e-ám ama-gan-ra ga-ša-an urú<note place='foot'>Var. SBH.
43, 35 <hi rend='italic'>ur-ra-ge</hi>.</note> bar-ra-ra dumu-ni
zí-em-mà-na-ad(!)-du</hi></l>
<l>36. How long shall the child-bearing mother, queen of the city, cast aside her
son?<note place='foot'>Parallel passages do not mention the <q>queen
of the city</q> but only the ordinary mother who
rejects her children, SBH. 131, 58-61; BL. 74, 10.
The phrase refers obviously to the mother
goddess. <q>Her son</q> must be interpreted figuratively in the sense that the mother
goddess is the protector of all human creatures.</note></l>
</lg>

<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>

<lg>
<l>37. <hi rend='italic'>te-e-ám  ama-gan-ra  ga-ša-an sun-na-ra<note place='foot'>This
title <hi rend='italic'>gašan-sun</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>nin-sun</hi>, really
means <hi rend='italic'>beltu rimtu</hi>, <q>the wild-cow queen,</q> and characterizes
the ancient mother goddess as patroness of cattle. The title usually refers to the married
type Gula or Bau, as in SBP. 284, 19, and note that Ninsun, mother of Gilgamish, is
frequently called <hi rend='italic'>ri-mat</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Poebel</hi>, OLZ,
1914, 4. The title also applies to the virgin type Innini in KL. 123
r. II 7.</note> dumu-ni zí-em-mà-na-ad-du</hi></l>
<l>37. How long shall the child-bearing mother, the wild-cow queen, reject her son?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>38. <hi rend='italic'>a urú-a mu-lu
im-me-a-ra<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>mu-lu imme</hi> also BE. 30, 9 I 2 =
<hi rend='italic'>bêl ḳûli</hi>(?), <q>Man of wailing.</q> The late version replaces
this line by <hi rend='italic'>[te-e-ám] da-ga-a-ta dumu-ni</hi>, <q>How long shall
the wife of the strong man reject her son?</q>, SBP. 114, 37.
<hi rend='italic'>dagāta = dam-guṭu</hi>, SBH. 131, 60.</note> dumu-ni
zí-em-mà-na-ad-du</hi></l>
<l>38. How long in the city shall he of wailing reject his son?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>39. <hi rend='italic'>a ki-dagar-ra-ám Nippur-ám ib
éš-ga-a-ra<note place='foot'>Probably a title of Ekur.
<hi rend='italic'>ešgalla</hi> title of the temple in Kullab, KL. 3 II 20. The late
version rejects this line since its local reference was not suited to general
use.</note></hi></l>
<l>39. How long in the wide land, in Nippur, in the region of the vast abode?</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>40. <hi rend='italic'>a-gal-gal šel-su-su mulu ta-zu mu-un-zu<note place='foot'>Here
this line begins an Enlil melody within the body of a series. Originally
<hi rend='italic'>a-gal-gal šel-su-su</hi> was a Nergal melody and a series based upon
it is catalogued in IV R. 53<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> 33 of which
K. 69 is the first tablet. See also <hi rend='smallcaps'>Böllenrücher</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Nergal</hi>, No. 6.</note></hi></l>
<l>40. Flood that drowns the harvests, who comprehends thy form?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>41. <hi rend='italic'>e-lum a-gal-gal šel-su-su mulu ta-zu mu-un-zu</hi></l>
<l>41. Exalted, flood that drowns the harvests who comprehends thy form?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>42. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>mu-ul-lil ù-mu-un
kur-kur-ra</hi></l>
<l>42. Enlil lord of the lands, who etc.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Obverse II</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un dúg-ga-zi-da<note place='foot'>The late
redaction of this melody revises this litany with the new liturgical movement
<hi rend='italic'>ursaggal&mdash;elimma</hi> placed before alternate lines. When
this scheme is employed all feminine
deities are omitted. See SBP. 114. Note 5 p. 115 <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>
is to be suppressed.</note></hi></l>
<l>1. Lord of the faithful word, who etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>mu-ul-lil
a-a ka-nag-ga</hi></l>
<l>2. Enlil father of the Land, who etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>sib sag-gíg-ga</hi></l>
<l>3. Shepherd of the dark-headed people, who etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>i-dé-duģ ní-te-na</hi></l>
<l>4. Thou of self-created vision, who etc.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>am erin-na sá-sá</hi></l>
<l>5. Hero who directs his hosts, who etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>ù-lul-a dúr-dúr</hi></l>
<l>6. Thou that sleepest the sleep of perversity, who etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>šag gi-ū gi-ū šă-ab túg-e túg-e</hi></l>
<l>7. Oh heart be reconciled, be reconciled, oh heart repose, repose.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>šag an-na gi-ū    gi-ū</hi></l>
<l>8. Oh heart of Anu be reconciled, be reconciled.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>šag <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>mu-ul-lil
gi-ū gi-ū</hi></l>
<l>9. Oh heart of Enlil be reconciled, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>šag ur-sag-gal gi-ū gi-ū<note place='foot'>Lines 7-10
conjecturally restored from <hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Liturgical Texts</hi> 165,
8-11.</note></hi></l>
<l>10. Oh heart of the great hero, be reconciled, etc.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>ní-ma-al-e zid al-ma-al<note place='foot'>Lines 11-17
restored from SBP. 116, 16 ff.</note> [li-]e<note place='foot'>Meaning
and restoration uncertain.</note> nap-tan-na aš-ša-ka-nu</hi></l>
<l>11. Kneaded bread for the feast I set,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>ní-ma-al-e ní-ma-al-e</hi></l>
<l>12. Kneaded bread, kneaded bread,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>ní-ma-al-e zid al-ma-al</hi></l>
<l>13. Kneaded bread for the feast I set,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>[kur-gal <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>en-lil-]da
šu-en-ne ba-túg</hi></l>
<l>14. By the Great Mountain, Enlil, it has been blessed.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>[a-a <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>mu-ul-lil]
šu-en-ne ba-túg</hi></l>
<l>15. By Father Enlil it has been blessed.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>[kur-gal
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>en-lil-]šu-en-ne ba-túg</hi></l>
<l>16. The Great Mountain Enlil has blessed.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>[a-a <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>mu-ul-lil]
šu-en-ne ba-túg</hi></l>
<l>17. The Father Enlil has blessed.<note place='foot'>First line on
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, No. 11 Col. II.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un am urú-zí-ib-(ki) šu-en-ne-ba-túg</hi></l>
<l>18. Lord, hero of the sacred city, has shown grace.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>ama-é-maģ<note place='foot'>See note on line 27
above.</note>-a <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>dam-gal-nun-na</hi></l>
<l>19. Mother of the house of the famous one, Damgalnunna, has shown grace.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>asar-lù-dug
dumu urú zí-ib-(ki)</hi></l>
<l>20. Asarludug, son of the sacred city, has shown grace.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>mu-ud-na-an-ni
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>apin<note place='foot'>Usually
<hi rend='italic'>pà</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>ekû</hi>, canal, is
used in this title of Zarpanit. She is originally a patroness of
irrigation and ultimately identical with Ninā.</note>-nun-na-an-ki</hi></l>
<l>21. His wife Zarpanit has shown grace.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>ìd ama urú
zi-ib-(ki)</hi></l>
<l>22. River goddess, mother of the sacred city, has shown grace.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>a-rĭ-e
ga-ša-an ab-su-di<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>ab-su</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>ab-zu</hi>, sea? Cf. <hi rend='italic'>ab-zu-bil-la</hi>,
the shining ocean, KL. 1 Rev. I 19 f.</note></hi></l>
<l>23. Zarpanit queen of ..., etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>sukkal-zid mu-dug-ga-sá-a šu-ba-e-en</hi></l>
<l>24. Faithful messenger, called by a good name, has shown grace.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>ní-ma-al-e zí-ib ni-ma-al-la-ta</hi></l>
<l>25. The kneaded bread which has been well made,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. <hi rend='italic'>zí-ib ni-ma-al-la-ta ní-ma-al-e zí-ib-bi
dé-kùr-e<note place='foot'>SBP. 116, 27
<hi rend='italic'>dé-en-kùr-e</hi>.</note></hi></l>
<l>26. Which has been well made, the kneaded bread may he eat graciously,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>mu-ul-lil-li
zí-ib-bi-kùr zí-ib-bi dé-kùr-e</hi></l>
<l>27. May Enlil graciously eat; yea graciously eat.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>28. <hi rend='italic'>ki an-dúr-ru-na-šú uku<note place='foot'>Var.
<hi rend='italic'>u-mi-a</hi>, SBP. 116, 33.</note>-e gar-ma-an-zí-en</hi></l>
<l>28. Where Anu sits may the people hasten.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29. <hi rend='italic'>[<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>A-nun-na<note
place='foot'>Line 29 is false and to be corrected after the late text SBP.
p. 118, 35 f. which has two lines.
Read <hi rend='italic'>ki an dúr-ru-na-šú
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>A-nun-na [gar-ma-an-zí-en]</hi>, where Anu
sits let the Anunnaki hasten.</note>-]ki-an-dúr-ru-na-šú uku-e gar ma-an-zí-en</hi></l>
<l>29. [<hi rend='italic'>The Anunnaki.</hi>] Where Anu sits let the people hasten.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>30. <hi rend='italic'>é-e ám-ba-al ne-sag-maģ<note place='foot'>Cf. SBH. 44,
37.</note> é-e am-ba-al</hi></l>
<l>30. To the temple he enters, the mighty priest of sacrifices to the temple enters.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31. <hi rend='italic'>a-tú-tú ma-mu šu-luģ-ge a-tú-tú ma-mu</hi></l>
<l>31. A libation he offers, the priest of hand washing a libation offers.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32. <hi rend='italic'>é-e ud-šă-ab-šú e-dam ud-šuš-šú e-dam</hi></l>
<l>32. To the temple at mid-day go up! at sun-set go up.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33. <hi rend='italic'>ud-da ne-sag-e šu-si-sá e-dam</hi></l>
<l>33. Daily to direct the sacrifices go up!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>34. <hi rend='italic'>ud-da ù-gul-ma-ma šu-si-sá e-dam</hi></l>
<l>34. Daily to direct the prayers go up!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>35. <hi rend='italic'>ud-da an dìm-me-ir mu-zu an-ni zu-zu-dam</hi></l>
<l>35. Daily Anu merciful god<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>ilu
ra'imu</hi>.</note> on high <hi rend='italic'>proclaim</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>36. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>am-an-ki am
urú-zi-ib-(ki) an-ni zu-zu-dam</hi></l>
<l>36. The hero of heaven and earth, hero of the sacred city on high
<hi rend='italic'>proclaim</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>37. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>en-lil
mà-gùn<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>napḫar māti</hi>, cf. IV
R. 23<hi rend='italic'>b</hi> 15.</note>
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>en-lil gùn-uku-e gar-ma-an-zi-en</hi></l>
<l>37. To Enlil let all the land, to Enlil let all the people hasten.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>

<lg>
<l>38. <hi rend='italic'>an-ni a-ma-an-tú an-gù(?) an-ni a-ma-an-tú šă-ab
ám-ma-ab-túg-e</hi></l>
<l>38. Unto heaven verily I will libate water, unto the <hi rend='italic'>canopy</hi>
of heaven, unto heaven verily I will libate water. The heart I will appease.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>39. <hi rend='italic'>im-ma-an-a-tú a ám-ma-ab-túg-e</hi></l>
<l>39. I will pour out a libation, the father I will appease.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>40. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>am-an-ki am
urú-zí-ib-(ki) ám-ma-ab-túg-e<note place='foot'>It is not certain
that this melody ended here. Possibly all the titles in lines 19-27 followed
here with the refrain <hi rend='italic'>am-ma-ab-túg-e</hi>. At
any rate the traces of a last line on SBH. 44 are those
of the last line of this melody. There is not space enough
on SBH. 44 after line 37 for more than
the lines 31-40 supplied above for we must make some allowance for the interlinear Semitic
translations in the break on SBH. 44.</note></hi></l>
<l>40. The hero of heaven and earth, the hero of the sacred city I will appease.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Col. III</hi>
</p>

<p>
(Here began a melody of which ten lines at least are lost.)
</p>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>é-</hi>....[<hi rend='italic'>ta</hi> (=KL. 11 Obv. III 1)]</l>
<l>11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>unugal(?)-da</hi>....[<hi rend='italic'>ta</hi>    ]</l>
<l>12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>dù-sag-áš<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>šubat
pirišti.</hi> This sanctuary at Nippur is mentioned in BE. 29 No.
5 Obv. 11; <hi rend='italic'>dù-sag</hi> in
KL. 64 II 4 and III 6.</note>-ta</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>é-bi-tūr-ta
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi></hi>[    ]</l>
<l>14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>éš è-bàr-ta</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>éš é-an-na-</hi>[<hi rend='italic'>ta</hi>    ]</l>
<l>16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>še-ib</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>17.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18-22 ...</l>
<l>18-22 ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'>é</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>dù</hi>(?) [    ]</l>
<l>24.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. ...</l>
<l>25.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. <hi rend='italic'>[mu-un-]túg-gà-ta</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>26. He has been pacified [    ]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. <hi rend='italic'>mu-un-túg-gà-ta</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>27. He has been pacified [    ]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28. <hi rend='italic'>mu-un-túg-gà-ta</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>28. He has been pacified [    ]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29. <hi rend='italic'>mu-un-túg-gà-ta šag
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi></hi>[    ]</l>
<l>29. He has been pacified, the heart of ... [has been pacified]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>30. <hi rend='italic'>mu-un-túg-gà-ta kur-gal
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>m[u-ul-lil mu-un-túg-gà-ta]</hi></l>
<l>30. He has been pacified, the great mountain [Enlil has been pacified]</l>
</lg>

<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>

<lg>
<l>31. <hi rend='italic'>edin-na</hi> ? <hi rend='italic'>-a erida (ki)-ta</hi></l>
<l>31. In the ... plain of Eridu....<note place='foot'>End of the sixth melody.</note></l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>32. <hi rend='italic'>a-ma-ru na-nam kur al-gul-gul</hi></l>
<l>32. A tempest it is shattering the mountain.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un-e e-ne-em-mà-ni a-ma-[ru na-nam]</hi></l>
<l>33. The word of the lord is a tempest.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>34. <hi rend='italic'>šăb-bi e-lum-e a-ma-ru na-[nam]</hi></l>
<l>34. The heart<note place='foot'>Heart is used here in the sense <q>wrath.</q></note>
of the exalted is a tempest.<note place='foot'>Cf. SBP. 98, 40 f.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>35. <hi rend='italic'>šăb-bi <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>mu-ul-lil
a-ma-ru na-nam</hi></l>
<l>35. The heart of Enlil is a tempest.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>36. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un-na šag an-šú an ní-ne ba-ni-ib-gam-ma-[ne]</hi></l>
<l>36. The heart of the lord is in heaven and the heavens waver of
themselves.<note place='foot'>Cf. SBP. 98, 44; 124, 19.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>37. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>mu-ul-lil
e-ne-em ki-šú ki ní sīg-ga-ni</hi></l>
<l>37. The word of Enlil is on earth and the earth trembles of itself.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>38. <hi rend='italic'>e-ne-em-mà <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>a-nun-na
gil-li-em-eš-[a-ni]<note place='foot'>Cf. SBP. 38, 13.</note></hi></l>
<l>38. The word which brings woe to the spirits of earth.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>39. <hi rend='italic'>e-ne-em-mà-ni a-zu nu-tuk šim-šar nu-[un-    tuk]</hi></l>
<l>39. His word a prophet has not; a magician it has not.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>40. <hi rend='italic'>e-ne-em-mà-ni a-ma-ru zi-ga gab-šu-gar
nu-un-tuk<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> 98, 48.</note></hi></l>
<l>40. His word is an onrushing tempest, an adversary to oppose it has not.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(Here followed Obv. IV; eight or ten lines continued this melody to the
word. Their contents were similar to SBP. 100, 49-57 ff.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reverse III</hi><note place='foot'>In case the
tablet possessed five columns like KL. 25 then this column is Rev. III. I know
of no <hi rend='italic'>four</hi> column tablets of similar kind.</note>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>sukkal-zid mu-dug-ga-sà-a</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>1. The faithful messenger, he called by a good name.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>dingir ga-še-dé a-be-in-si sag</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>2. The god who satiates with milk and grain,
<hi rend='italic'>sag</hi><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>sag</hi> began a
refrain which followed the titles of Enlil, Ea, etc. and ended with this line.
See Obv. I 21-31, etc.</note>....</l>
</lg>

<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>an-ki-bi-da im-mi-ib-ģun-gà</hi></l>
<l>3. Heaven and earth it has pacified.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>ki-an-bi-da im-mi-ib-ģun-gà</hi></l>
<l>4. Earth and heaven it pacified.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>ud é-kùr-ta kùr-gal
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>mu-ul-lil [im-mi-ib-ģun-gà]</hi></l>
<l>5. When in Ekur the great mountain Enlil it pacified,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>é-lam-ma<note place='foot'>Cf. SBP. 82, 47.</note>-ta
ama-gal <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>nin-lil im[-mi-ib-ģun-gà]</hi></l>
<l>6. [When] in Elamma the great mother Ninlil it pacified,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>an-ni-gar-ra<note place='foot'>A title of
Egalmah in Isin, SBH. 94, 29 = SBP. 186, 29.</note>-ta ereš<note place='foot'>Either
DAM or <hi rend='italic'>SAL + KU</hi> (sister) must be expected, since
we have obviously a reference to Aruru here.</note>
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>mu-ul-[-lil im-mi-ib-ģun-gà]</hi></l>
<l>7. In Annigarra the <hi rend='italic'>consort (sister)</hi> of Enlil it pacified.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>e-lum di-da-ra dé-en<note place='foot'>Sic! An error
for <hi rend='italic'>en-ne</hi>? See SBP. 120, 1. Perhaps
<hi rend='italic'>dé</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>te</hi>, <q>where?</q>
strengthened by <hi rend='italic'>en</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>adi</hi>.</note>
ga-ám-dúr</hi></l>
<l>8. The exalted who walketh forth, where tarries he?<note place='foot'>The following
melody has been restored from the late variant SBP. p. 120.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>di-da-ra e-lum di-da-ra dé-en ga-ám-dúr</hi></l>
<l>9. Who walketh forth, the exalted who walketh forth, where tarries he?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un-e kur-kur-[ra-ge di-da-ra]</hi></l>
<l>10. The lord of the lands, who walketh forth, where tarries he?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>[ù-mu-]un-e dúg-ga-zi-da    di</hi></l>
<l>11. The lord of faithful word, who etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>mu-ul-lil a-a
ka-nag-gà    di</hi></l>
<l>12. Enlil, father of the Land, who etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>sib sag-gíg-ga    di</hi></l>
<l>13. Shepherd of the dark-headed people, who etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>i-dé-duģ ní-te-na    di</hi></l>
<l>14. He of self-created vision, who etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>am erin-na sá-sá    di</hi></l>
<l>15. Hero that directs his hosts, who etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>ù-lul-la dúr-dúr    di</hi></l>
<l>16. He that sleeps the sleep of perversity, who etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>me-e bur-maģ-a kaš ga-an-na-ab nisak-ka</hi></l>
<l>17. I in a great bowl will pour out wine to him.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>ama-gim dugud<note place='foot'>Glossed
<hi rend='italic'>gú-da</hi>.</note>-da da-mu-un-lal</hi></l>
<l>18. I like a wild ox will bow down to the mighty one.<note place='foot'>Semitic
<hi rend='italic'>lu-uk-mi-is-su</hi>, glossed <hi rend='italic'>kamû</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>kamû</hi>, <q>to bind,</q> is the natural rendering of
<hi rend='italic'>lal</hi>.
The Semitic should perhaps be neglected as faulty and the Sumerian rendered,
<q>Like a wild ox by the mighty one I am hobbled.</q></note></l>
</lg>

<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>urú-zu al-gul-gul ga-an-na-ab-dúg</hi></l>
<l>19. <q>Thy city is destroyed,</q> will I say to him.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. <hi rend='italic'>kenur é-nam-ti-la    al</hi></l>
<l>20. <q>Kenur and Enamtila are destroyed,</q> will I say to him.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>zimbir-(ki) é-bàr-ra    al</hi></l>
<l>21. <q>In Sippar Ebarra is destroyed,</q> etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>urú-zu tin-tir-(ki)    al</hi></l>
<l>22. <q>Thy city Babylon is destroyed,</q> etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'>é-sag-ila bád-si-ab-ba-(ki)    al</hi></l>
<l>23. <q>Esagila and Barsippa are destroyed,</q> etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>é-zi-da é-maģ-ti-la    al</hi></l>
<l>24. <q>Ezida and Emahtila are destroyed,</q> etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>é-te-me-en-an-ki    al</hi></l>
<l>25. <q>Etemenanki is destroyed,</q> etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. <hi rend='italic'>é-dár-an-na    al<note place='foot'>Lines 21-26
may not have stood in the ancient liturgy.</note></hi></l>
<l>26. <q>Edaranna is destroyed,</q> etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. <hi rend='italic'>gi-er-ra ba-mă ga-an-na-ab-dúg<note place='foot'>Here begins
variant 81-7-27, 203 = BA. X 87.</note></hi></l>
<l>27. <q>Wailing on the reed-flute ascends in her,</q><note place='foot'>Nippur.</note>
will I say to him.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28. <hi rend='italic'>ud ma-ra mu-un-zal-la-ta i-dé-a-ni nu-gub</hi></l>
<l>28. When I am overjoyous in his presence may I not stand.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>mu-ul-lil-li
mu-un-zal-la-ta i-dé-[a-ni nu-gub i-dé-nam-mu-un-dŭ-ru]</hi></l>
<l>29. As to Enlil when I am overjoyous in his presence may I not stand.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>30. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>mu-ul-lil-li
i-dé-a-ni nu-gub i-dé-nam-mu-un-dŭ-ru</hi></l>
<l>30. In the presence of Enlil may I not stand; may he behold me not.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>31. <hi rend='italic'>me-e ur-ri-mèn me-e kàs-mèn<note place='foot'>Beginning of
a melody of a weeping mother series, BL. p. 94, 12. It is not certain that this
melody stood in the ancient text. See for the text 81-7-28, 203 (= 78239) in this
volume.</note></hi></l>
<l>31. I am a stranger and a fugitive.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32. <hi rend='italic'>a è-ne al-dib a è-ne al-dib</hi></l>
<l>32. The risen waters seized away; the risen waters seized away.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33. <hi rend='italic'>[nin]-urú-ma ama-gal
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>nin-lil-là [mèn]</hi></l>
<l>33. Queen of city and house, great mother Ninlil am I.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>34. <hi rend='italic'>[<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>a]-ru-ru SAL+KU
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>mu-ul-lil-là [mèn]</hi></l>
<l>34. Aruru, sister of Enlil I am.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>35. <hi rend='italic'>[nin?]ú-a gašan ni-ib-bur mèn</hi></l>
<l>35. A <hi rend='italic'>queenly</hi> caretaker, queen of Nippur I am.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>

<lg>
<l>36. <hi rend='italic'>[gašan] azag-ga<note place='foot'>Cf. SBH. 132, 27.</note>
gašan ma-gí-a mèn</hi></l>
<l>36. An holy queen, queen of the convent I am.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>37. <hi rend='italic'>ma ma-al-la-šú ma ma-al-la-šú</hi></l>
<l>37. In the builded house, in the builded house,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>38. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>mu-ul-lil
[umun?] kúr-kúr-ra ma</hi></l>
<l>38. Enlil [<hi rend='italic'>lord</hi>] of lands in the builded house,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>39. <hi rend='italic'>[ereš]-mu mu-un-til ma</hi></l>
<l>39. My consort dwells not in the builded house.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>40. At the end of this column began a long titular melody.<note place='foot'>The
duplicate, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Meek, No.</hi> 11, has here another
melody not a titular litany. This text does
not belong to the <hi rend='italic'>e-lum gud-sun</hi> series.</note></l>
</lg>

<p>
(Lines 1-11 of this melody, i. e., 40-51 on KL. 11, III, are supplied by
Tablet Virolleaud, Rev. 1-11, and restores the entire section.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reverse IV</hi>(?)
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil-li
dam-a-ni <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-lil-li</hi></l>
<l>1. Enlil and his consort Ninlil (we will pacify). (= Tab. Vir. Rev. 12.)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>An <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Uraša
ki-še-gu-nu-e<note place='foot'>This title of Uraša remains
unexplained. In all other examples
<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Uraša ki-še-gu-nu-ra</hi>,
SBP. 150, 6; 90, 20; K. 3931 Rev. 29; KL. 17 Rev. II 6. Perhaps also Gudea, Cyl. B 19, 13
is to be restored <hi rend='italic'>ki-še-gu-[nu-ra]</hi>.</note></hi></l>
<l>2. Anu-Uraš <hi rend='italic'>kisegunu</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-ki
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-ki En-ul
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-ul</hi></l>
<l>3. Enki and Ninki, Enul and Ninul.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-da-šurim-ma
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-da-šurim-ma</hi></l>
<l>4. Endašurimma, Nindašurimma.<note place='foot'>Father-mother
names of Enlil, IV Raw. 1<hi rend='italic'>b</hi> 17 f.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-dù-azag-ga
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-dù-azag-ga<note place='foot'>Enlil
names, CT. 24, 4, 24 f.</note></hi></l>
<l>5. The Lord of Duazag, the Queen of Duazag.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>ama <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-lil
a-a <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil</hi></l>
<l>6. Mother Ninlil and father Enlil.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-ut-til-<note
place='foot'>Enlil, CT. 24, 4, 20.</note>
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-me-en-šár-ra<note place='foot'>Usually
<hi rend='italic'>me-šár-ra</hi>. Enlil name, CT. 24, 4, 26. Not
originally associated with Nergal.
See <hi rend='italic'>Historical and Religious Texts</hi>, p. 35.</note></hi></l>
<l>7. Enuttilla and Enmenšarra.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>nin-zi-an-na<note place='foot'>Here both
titles of Ninlil. Variant <hi rend='italic'>nin-zíd-an-na</hi>, PSBA. 1911, 233 n.
39.</note> ga-ša-an ģar-sag-gà<note place='foot'>See previous footnote.</note></hi></l>
<l>8. Ninzianna and Ninharsag.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Šul-pa-è<note
place='foot'>Originally title of Enlil, CT. 24, 25, 97 = 13, 42. Usually Marduk as
Jupiter.</note> en <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>giš</hi>banšur-ra</hi></l>
<l>9. Šulpae, lord of the sacrificial board.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>ama še-en-tùr<note place='foot'>Two other
readings of this title of Ninlil as mother goddess are
known; <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Še-en-tūr</hi>, SBP.
150 n. 5, l. 11 and
<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Še-en-tur</hi>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>King</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Supplement</hi>
to <hi rend='smallcaps'>Bezold's</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Catalogue</hi>, p. 10, No. 51, 8
where she is identified with Nintud =
<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>bêlit</hi>.</note>
dim-me-ir imin</hi></l>
<l>10. Mother Šentur, (mother) of the seven gods.<note place='foot'>In ZA.
VI 242, 21 their mother is Išhara, another title of the same mother goddess. For
the seven gods see IV Raw. 21 No. 1 B.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un si<note place='foot'>Perhaps =
<hi rend='italic'>si-gal</hi>, title of Ninurta, SBH. 132, 26; BL. 92, 7. CT. 24, 7,
12.</note>Nipru-(ki) ù-mu-un kalag-a</hi></l>
<l>11. The lord <hi rend='italic'>light</hi> of Nippur, mighty lord.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>gù-de-de<note place='foot'>Usually title of Ninlil as
here, SBH. 132, 23; SBP. 150 n. 5, 13. But consort of Ninurta,
CT. 24, 7, 12.</note> ga-ša-an Nipru-(ki)</hi></l>
<l>12. The loud crying, queen of Nippur.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>dingir dumu-sag<note place='foot'>Var.
<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Nappasi</hi>.</note>
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>ga-ša-an mu-un-ga-ra</hi></l>
<l>13. Divine first born daughter, divine queen of treasures.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nusku
[á-]maģ dingir-gidim [é-kur-ra]</hi></l>
<l>14. Nusku of mighty message, divine spirit of Ekur.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>[15. <hi rend='italic'>ama é-a-ge
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Sa-dár-nun-na</hi>]</l>
<l>[15. Mother of the temple, Sadar-nunna.]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>[16. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Še-ra-aģ
gidim é-šar-ra</hi>]</l>
<l>[16. Šerah spirit of Ešarra.]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>[17. <hi rend='italic'>lamma-šág-ga me-lam-an-na</hi>]</l>
<l>[17. The propitious spirit whose splendor is supreme.]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>dumu [sukkal-gal <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nannar
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Zuen-na</hi></l>
<l>18. The son, [great messenger, Nannar-Sin.]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-[nu-NUNUZ-zi
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nannar<note place='foot'>The entire
ideogram was read <hi rend='italic'>zir</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>zirru</hi>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Smith</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Miscel. Texts</hi> 25, 16.</note>
dam <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nannar-ge]</hi></l>
<l>19. Zir [spouse of Nannar].</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. <hi rend='italic'>nu-banda-[maģ
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil-la-zi-ge]</hi></l>
<l>20. [The august] prefect, [divine Enlilzi]<note place='foot'>A legendary
king who had received apotheosis, and was placed in the court of Enlil, CT.
24, 6, 20 = 8 Col. III 1. The variant SBP. 152, 15 inserts another deified king Ur-Sin.
See also <hi rend='smallcaps'>Genouillac</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Drehem</hi>, 5501 II
21; <hi rend='italic'>Babylonian Liturgies</hi>, 92 Rev. 10; CT. 24, 6, 21.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>[En]-bu-[ul-e
dumu é-sab-ba]</hi></l>
<l>21. [Enbul son of Ešabba.]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>šul-a[n-na umun ģar-sag-ģal-ge]</hi></l>
<l>22. Hero of [heaven, lord of the great mountain.]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>ga-ša-[an-gal-e
ama-an-na-ge]</hi></l>
<l>23. Ningal [heavenly mother.]</l>
</lg>

<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>ga-ša-[an    an-na
áš-ni-gi-ge<note place='foot'>Or <hi rend='italic'>gi-ur-sag</hi>. The
Semitic is <hi rend='italic'>ša ediš-ši-ša ḳarradat</hi>. On
Innini queen of heaven, see <hi rend='italic'>Tammuz
and Ishtar</hi>, 88.</note></hi>]</l>
<l>24. The queen of heaven [who alone is strong.]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>mu-ud-[na-ni
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Ama-ušum-gal-an-na]</hi></l>
<l>25. Her husband [Tammuz.]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. <hi rend='italic'>ama ù-[mu-un-na gašan sun-]na</hi></l>
<l>26. The mother of the lord,<note place='foot'>I. e., Gilgamish.</note> Ninsun.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. <hi rend='italic'>ù-[mu-un banda ù-mu-un èš-]nun-na</hi></l>
<l>27. Lugalbanda lord of Ešnunak.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28. <hi rend='italic'>é-rib an-na mu-tin-an-na</hi></l>
<l>28. The heavenly sister-in-law, Geštinanna.<note place='foot'>See
<hi rend='italic'>Tammuz and Ishtar</hi> 57, n. 2.</note></l>
</lg>

<p>
(Here supply twenty-eight lines = SBP 154, 24-156, 51.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reverse V</hi>(?)
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-á-nun ama
gù-an-ni-si</hi></l>
<l>1. Enanun mother of loud weeping.<note place='foot'>On this title of
the weeping mother, see <hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Liturgical Texts</hi> 173.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>NINDA +
GUD<note place='foot'>A title of Immer the thunder god.</note> amar
zag-gi-ra<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Zagin-na</hi> to
<hi rend='italic'>zaggira</hi>, see <hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Grammar</hi>, §
47.</note></hi></l>
<l>2. Ninda-Gud, the radiant son.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Sú-nir-da<note
place='foot'>Aja goddess of light and battle, <hi rend='italic'>Babylonian Liturgies</hi>
143.</note> en šul-mé-ra</hi></l>
<l>3. Šunirda, queen, heroine of battle.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>dumu-šág-ga ga-ša-an
kár<note place='foot'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>AZAG</hi> an
error?</note>-nun-na-ra</hi></l>
<l>4. The pious daughter, Ninkar-nunna.<note place='foot'>Cf. K. 7145, 7 in CT. 29,
47.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>ga-ša-an dig-ga
dingir-lum-ma<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>d</hi>Lum-ma</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>Ḫumma</hi>, CT. 24, 6, 18
one of two <hi rend='italic'>utukku</hi> of Ekur. Duplicate 24, 22, 117.
Often in names of the early period, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Scheil</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Textes Elamites-Semitiques</hi>, p. 4 and in name of ancient
patesi of Umma, <hi rend='italic'>Ur-lum-ma</hi>, see
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Thureau-Dangin</hi>, SAK. 273. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Scheil</hi>, I.
c. 4, says that <hi rend='italic'>Lum</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ḫum</hi> is an
Elamitic god. The title <hi rend='italic'>gašan-dig-ga</hi> indicates a female deity.
Note the variant <hi rend='italic'>gašan-sa-lum-ma</hi>, SBP. 158, 56. An underworld
deity.</note> ur-sag</hi></l>
<l>5. Queen(?) of the dead, Lumma the heroic.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un uru<note place='foot'>Br. No. 909.
Var. SBP. 158, 57 = V Raw. 52 II 27, has <hi rend='italic'>unugal</hi>.</note>-gal
ù-mu-un é<note place='foot'>Var. of
<hi rend='italic'>á</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>idu</hi>.</note>-gid-da</hi></l>
<l>6. Lord of the grave, lord of the seizing hand.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Ir<note place='foot'>Sign
<hi rend='italic'>NITAḪ</hi>. See Var. <hi rend='italic'>ir-ra</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Liturgical Texts</hi>, p. 174, 7.</note>-ra-gal
kú-a-nu-si-ra<note place='foot'>For <hi rend='italic'>gud-á-nu-gí-a</hi>, ox
that turns not back his might. See I. c. 173 n. 3. For <hi rend='italic'>g</hi> to
<hi rend='italic'>s</hi> see <hi rend='italic'>Sum. Gr.</hi> § 40
<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>.</note></hi></l>
<l>7. Great Girra, hero unopposable.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>lamma-šág-ga sil-gig edin-na</hi></l>
<l>8. The good genius of the dark ways of the plain.<note place='foot'>Spirit
of the lower world, CT. 24, 8, 13.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-sîg-ge
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Guškin-banda-ra</hi></l>
<l>9. Ninsig Guškinbanda,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un nig-nam-ma-ge ḪU<note place='foot'>Vars.
<hi rend='italic'>šun</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>šen</hi> SBP. 158, 61; CT. 24,
23, 24. Hence <hi rend='italic'>ḪU</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>mušen</hi>) has also
the value <hi rend='italic'>šen</hi>
or <hi rend='italic'>šun</hi>. See on lines 9 f. <hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Liturgical
Texts</hi> 174 n. 5.</note>-kur-kur<note place='foot'>For
<hi rend='italic'>kul</hi>.</note></hi></l>
<l>10. Lord of whatsoever is, the sculptured form.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>sal-si<note place='foot'>Gunu of <hi rend='italic'>ḪU</hi>.
Var. <hi rend='italic'>NU-NUNUZ-ki-a</hi>, see SBP. 158, 62 = CT. 24, 10, 2.</note>-a
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Ba-ú<note place='foot'>Var.
<hi rend='italic'>A-mà-mà</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ma-ma</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Ma-mi</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mà-mà</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>A-mà</hi> = Bau, Nintud.</note>-šág-ga</hi></l>
<l>11. The earth woman, beneficent Bau.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un né me en<note place='foot'>For
<hi rend='italic'>en-me</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>bêl parṣi</hi>. Var.
<hi rend='italic'>umun me</hi>. Here certainly a male deity as
<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Nin-né</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>Almu</hi>,
form of Nergal in V Raw. 21, 25. For <hi rend='italic'>Nin-né</hi> in the
early period see <hi rend='smallcaps'>Allotte de la Fuÿe</hi>, DP.
128 II 3. But <hi rend='italic'>Nin-né</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>Nin-né-mal</hi> =
Alamu, form of Allat sister Ninlil, CT. 24, 10, 3, cf. V R.
21, 26.</note> ga-ša-an abzu</hi></l>
<l>12. Lord of might, lord of decrees, priest of the deep.<note place='foot'>Variant
SBP. 158, 63 = SBH. 86, 63 reads <hi rend='italic'>šanga-maģ abzu-ge</hi>. For
the writing of <hi rend='italic'>šanga</hi>, see
<hi rend='italic'>Babylonian Liturgies</hi>, p. XXII n. 2.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Ašnan
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Azag-sug<note place='foot'>On variants
<hi rend='italic'>Duru-sug</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Dúr-ru-si-ga</hi>, see
<hi rend='italic'>Sum. Lit. Texts</hi> 174, 9.</note>
mun-galu<note place='foot'>Sic! Perhaps error for
<hi rend='italic'>ģa-mun</hi>. See also CT. 24, 9,
40 <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Ḫa-mun-sal(?)-sal?</hi>.
SBP. 158, 64.</note>-sal-sal</hi></l>
<l>13. Ašnan the divine cleanser, the ... loud crying.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>[ù-mu-un] sa-a<note place='foot'>Title of
Shamash, CT. 25, 25, 11.</note> ki-sá<note place='foot'>Title of Shamash here.
Variant <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Su-ud-ăm</hi> =
Aja, CT. 25, 9, 25.</note> dumu nun-ra</hi></l>
<l>14. Lord of light, director of the earth, and the daughter of the
prince.<note place='foot'>I. e. Aja.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>[gidim uru-]ma ur sag-imin</hi></l>
<l>15. The demon of my city the dog of seven heads.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>[<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Gi-bil mu-
? ?]-na<note place='foot'>So! Var. <hi rend='italic'>mu-galam</hi>,
<q>of skilful name.</q></note> mu-ten ur-sag</hi></l>
<l>16. Gibil ... warlike man.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>[<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Ut-ta-ed-dé mu-lu]
ki-azag-ga</hi></l>
<l>17. Uttaedde lord of the holy place.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>[umun ma-da sub-be an-na    ]</hi></l>
<l>18. [Lord of the land, light of heaven.]<note place='foot'>See Var.
<hi rend='italic'>Sum. Lit. Texts</hi> 175, 10.</note></l>
</lg>

<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>

<lg>
<l>19. [<hi rend='italic'>umun á-zu umun e<note place='foot'>So Var. l.
c. I. 11. See above, line 6.</note>-gid-da</hi>    ]</l>
<l>19. [Lord Nergal, him of the seizing hand.]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. [<hi rend='italic'>ga-ša-an-né-da umun mu-zi-da</hi>]</l>
<l>20. [Allat and Ningišzida]<note place='foot'>Certainly these
two underworld deities are intended in this line. They occur together also
in CT. 25, 5, 60-64. See also 25, 8, 14 where read
Nin-<hi rend='italic'>né</hi>-da.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. [    ] <hi rend='italic'>dū-a</hi></l>
<l>21. [    ]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. [    ]<hi rend='italic'>-ga</hi></l>
<l>22. [    ]<note place='foot'>Two lines not on any variant.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'>[<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Ir-ri-eš ur-sag
ga-ša]-an-subur</hi></l>
<l>23. [Irriš, the heroic] lord of the soil.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. [<hi rend='italic'>dingir ama é-uru-sag-gà gašan tin-dib-ba</hi>]</l>
<l>24. [The divine mother of the temple of the chief city<note place='foot'>Gula
of Isin.</note> queen who gives life to the dead.]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>[sag-gà an-na gašan] Í-si-in-na</hi></l>
<l>25. The lofty browed queen of Isin.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. <hi rend='italic'>[<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Pa-bil-sag ù-mu-]un
La-ra-ag-ga</hi></l>
<l>26. Pabil-sag<note place='foot'>See for reading, <hi rend='italic'>Sum. Lit.
Texts</hi> 176, 5.</note> lord of Larak.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. <hi rend='italic'>[<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Gu-nu-ra dim-gal]
kalam-ma</hi></l>
<l>27. Gunura bar of the Land.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28. <hi rend='italic'>[<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Da-mu šág-ga
ù-]mu-un gir-su-a</hi></l>
<l>28. The pious Damu lord of the flood.<note place='foot'>See
<hi rend='italic'>Babylonian Liturgies</hi> 96 n. 1.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29. <hi rend='italic'>[<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Immer ù-mu-un]
ní-dŭ-an-na</hi></l>
<l>29. Immer lord of terror.<note place='foot'>For variants, see
<hi rend='italic'>Sum. Lit. Texts</hi> 177, 8.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>30. [    ] <hi rend='italic'>íd-da-ra</hi></l>
<l>30. ... the river.<note place='foot'>Variant SBP. 160, 16 has another
text. Other variants omit the line altogether, KL.
8 IV 8; <hi rend='italic'>Sum. Lit. Texts</hi>, 177.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31. <hi rend='italic'>[ù-mu-un ši ka-nag-]gà ši kur-kur-ra</hi></l>
<l>31. Lord of the souls of Sumer, of the souls of the lands.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32. <hi rend='italic'>[<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Sú-ud-da-am du-mu
nun-na ama é-]šab-ba</hi></l>
<l>32. Suddam, daughter of the prince, mother of Ešabba.</l>
</lg>

<p>
About twenty-four lines completed this column and ended the liturgy.
The void is to be completed by part of the titular litany, SBP. 160, 19-164,
38, and by a short intercession similar to the fragmentary intercession at the
end of KL. No. 8. It is possible that the eleventh and last section on Tablet
Virolleaud was retained as the final melody of this later redaction.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Reverse of Tablet Virolleaud (The titular litany)</head>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>é-e sub-da sub-da [mu-un-laģ-en-ne-en]</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>To the temple with prayer, with prayer let us
go.<note place='foot'>Cf. SBP. 74, 19 and 68, 5.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>balag<note place='foot'>For this sign = REC. 46,
see now K.L., 25 III 15. The two signs <hi rend='italic'>balag</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>dup</hi> are distinguished
clearly on this tablet; see Obv. 9 for <hi rend='italic'>dup</hi>.
On the distinction of two original signs in
Br. 7024, see <hi rend='smallcaps'>Thureau-Dangin</hi>, ZA. 15,
167; Chicago Syllabary 208 f., and PBS. 12 No. 11 Obv.
Col. II 45 and 46 and page 13. Syl. B distinguishes the two signs.</note>
é-e dirig sub-da [mu-un-laģ-en-ne-en]</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>To the lyre unto the temple which surpasses all let us go.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>balag nigin-na-e sub-da
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-[ul-lil-ra mu-un]</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>To the lyre unto the merciful one with prayer, [unto Enlil,]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>balag dîm-me-ir mu-lu sub-da
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-[lil-ra mu-un]</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>To the lyre unto god, the lord, with prayer, unto Enlil
[let us go].</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>dîm-me-ir lu-gă-lu-ne-en sub-da mu-un-laģ-en-[ne-en]</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Unto him who is god of his people with prayer let us go.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>me-en-ne é-e tùb a-ra-zu-a mu-un-laģ-en-ne-[en]</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>We <q>Oh temple repose</q> in prayer come.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>me-en-ne ki-e tùb a-ra-zu-a mu-un-laģ-(en)-ne-en
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-[ul-lil-ra]</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>We <q>Oh earth repose</q> in prayer come, unto Enlil (come).</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un šă-ab tùb-e-da in-gà<note place='foot'>See
RA. 11, 45 n. 5.</note>-laģ-(en)-ne-en
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-[ul-lil-ra]</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>To pacify the heart of the lord behold we come unto Enlil.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>šă-ab ģun-gà bar ģun-gà-da in-gà-laģ-ne-en
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-[ul-lil-ra]</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>To pacify the heart, to pacify the soul, behold we come
to Enlil.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>me-en-ne šă-ab ù-mu-un-na mu-un-tùb-(en)-ne-en
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-[ul-lil]</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>We will pacify the heart of the lord, yea of Enlil.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>šă-ab an-na šă-ab
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil-lá mu-un-tub-(en)-ne-en</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The heart of Anu and the heart of Enlil we will pacify.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil-lá dam-a-ni ...
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-lil-lá</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>[The heart of] Enlil and his wife Ninlil [we will pacify.]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-ki
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-ki
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-mul
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-mul<note place='foot'>All father-mother
names of Enlil, CT. 34, 3, 29 ff.</note></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The heart of Enki, Ninki, Enmul and Ninmul [we will pacify.]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>i-lu a-di ig-ga-am-ma-ru</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>A god until they are finished.<note place='foot'>This Semitic
rubric is unique in the published literature of Sumerian liturgies. It indicates
that the choristers should here complete the long titular litany by reciting the
titles of the deities named in the litany given in full on the Berlin tablet; see
the preceding edition of K. L. 11 Rev. IV 1 ff.</note></l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 8'><hi rend='italic'>ki-šub-gú 10-kam-ma<note place='foot'>For
this rubric, see PBS. X 151 note 1.</note></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The tenth strophe.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 12'>(The Recessional)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un-mu za-e babbar<note place='foot'>For Enlil
connected with the idea of light, see PBS. X 158 n. 1.</note>
uru-mà ur-sag-gà me-en</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>My lord thou art, light of my city, a hero thou art.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>šùb-bi-mu ù-mu-un kalag-a ur-sag-gà me-en</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>My illumination, oh valiant lord, a hero thou art.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un kalag-a ur-sag-gà me-en kalag-ga-na me-en</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Oh valiant lord, a hero thou art, its<note place='foot'>The
pronoun refers apparently to <hi rend='italic'>uru</hi> in line 15.</note>
defender thou art.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Babbar-gim za-e ?
en-na an-ni tur-tur-ne-[en]</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Like Shamash thou art ... into heaven enters.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nannar-gim ki dumu-zu
an-na(?)<note place='foot'>Text <hi rend='italic'>na-an</hi>!</note>
na-an-gir-ri-[ne-en]</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Like Nannar where thy son<note place='foot'>The moon god
was held to be the son of Enlil, SBP. 296, 5.</note> in heaven hastens.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un-mu enem-zu galu-ra<note place='foot'>Cf. BL. 48,
23.</note> na-an-na-ab-zí-[em]</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>My lord thy word on man has fallen.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>enem-zu galu ki<note place='foot'>Text
<hi rend='italic'>DI</hi>.</note>-kal-ra na-an-na-ab-zí-[em</hi>]</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Thy word on him of the foreign land has fallen.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>enem-zu galu en-na nu-šeg-ra na-an-na-ab-zí-[em</hi>]</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Thy word on men as many as are not obedient has fallen.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un-mu uru-zu-a è-ni a-sar-sar-ra<note place='foot'>Same
phrase in Ni. 14005, 24. See <hi rend='italic'>Le Poème Sumèrien du Paradis</hi>, p.
140.</note></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>My lord <hi rend='italic'>beneficent</hi> waters in thy city
cause to spring forth.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>a-a<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi> Mu-ul-lil
ki-bur-ta-bur-ta uru-zu-a è-ni</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Father Enlil ... in thy city cause to come forth.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 8'><hi rend='italic'>ki-šub-gù</hi>
11<hi rend='italic'>-kam-ma</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The eleventh strophe.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>sub-bi še-ib è-kur-ra-ta ki-na gí-gí-ra</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>A prayer for the brick walls of Ekur, that it return to its
place.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 8'><hi rend='italic'>ki-šú-bi-im</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>A song of supplication.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. <hi rend='italic'>al-tíl e-lum gud-sun</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>It is finished, the series <q>Exalted, bull that
overwhelms.</q></l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Early Form of the Series
<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Babbar-gim-è-ta</hi>
11359 (Myhrman No. 8)
</head>

<p>
Ni. 11359, published by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Myhrman</hi>, PBS. I. No. 8, is the
left upper corner of a large four column tablet. It contained a
series of <hi rend='italic'>ki-šub</hi> melodies which formed the prototype of the later
Enlil series of which three tablets have been edited by the
writer, see <hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Liturgical Texts</hi> 167. It stands to the
completed series as the similar tablet of the <hi rend='italic'>e-lum gud-sun</hi> series,
Tablet Virolleaud, is related to its completed canonical form in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, KL. 11. Both Ni. 11359 and Tablet Virolleaud show
the evolution of two great Enlil liturgies arrested midway in
their evolution. They still consist of unmethodically joined
melodies. Both have the same rubric at the end. The first
melody of <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Babbar-gim-è-ta</hi>
after line four agrees with the first
melody of the Enlil series <hi rend='italic'>zi-bu-ù sud-du-ám</hi>
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, KL. 8
and 9 after line five of that series. A duplicate will be found in
BL. pp. 37-39, which see for critical notes on the reconstructed
text.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Obverse</hi> 1
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Babbar-gim
è-ta</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>1. Like the sun-god arise ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un gan</hi> ...</l>
<l>2. Oh lord ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>a-a <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil
ù-[mu-un kur-kur-ra</hi></l>
<l>3. Father Enlil, lord of the lands.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil
ù-mu-[un dúg-ga-zi-da</hi>]</l>
<l>4. Enlil lord of faithful word.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>am-ná-a gud-dé sīg-gan-nu-di</hi></l>
<l>5. Crouching wild ox, bull that rests not.<note place='foot'>For
the interpretation, see RA. 12, 27 n. 5.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil
dam-kar-[ra ki-dagar-ra]</hi></l>
<l>6. Enlil herdsman of the wide earth.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un mu erin-na-[ni sag-ma-al ki</hi>]</l>
<l>7. Lord who <hi rend='italic'>summons</hi> his toilers, recorder of the earth.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un iá erin-a-[ni ga-eri-ám da-]ma-[la]</hi></l>
<l>8. Lord who causes to abound oil for his toilers, milk for the newly
born.<note place='foot'>See for readings BL. 38, 9.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>ù-mu-un ki-dúr-a-ni [uru ir-ir]</hi></l>
<l>9. Lord whose abode is the city of weeping.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>ki-ná-a-ni á-ág-[gà-e    gal-zu]</hi></l>
<l>10. In whose chamber oracles are interpreted.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>a-a <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil
uru-[ta Nibru-ki]</hi></l>
<l>11. Father Enlil in (thy) city Nippur.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>é-kur é-šag-gi-pad-da-ta</hi></l>
<l>12. In Ekur temple of (thy) heart's choice.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>gi-gun-na giš-tir-šim
[<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>giš</hi> erin-na-ta</hi></l>
<l>13. In the great dark chamber of odorous forest and cedar.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. [  <hi rend='italic'>] Šeš-dū-a-ka šeš-mul [... ta]</hi></l>
<l>14. In ...,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. [    <hi rend='italic'>]si-ra é-ŭ-[di- ta    ]</hi></l>
<l>15. In ... the house of vision,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>[    ]lu é babbar nu-[zu-ta</hi>]</l>
<l>16. In ... house which knows the sunlight not,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>[é]-gi-dim-dim-ma i-dé [nu-bar-ri-ta]</hi></l>
<l>17. In the house of the <q>reed of <hi rend='italic'>sorrow</hi>,</q>
which eye beholds not,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>[     ]maģ dug-li duģ-[duģ-ta]</hi></l>
<l>18. In the great ... causing prosperity to abound,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>[é(?)]-ku-a
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>giš</hi>ik-[ku-igi-lal-a-ta]</hi></l>
<l>19. In <hi rend='italic'>Ekua</hi> gate of the lifting of the eyes,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. [ <hi rend='italic'>]-silim-ma mu-mar [mar-ra-ta</hi>]</l>
<l>20.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>...</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reverse</hi> II
</p>

<lg>
<l>...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>sub-bi še-ib é-[kur-ra-ta?]
ki-na-an-gí-gí-ra<note place='foot'>See also
<hi rend='italic'>Tablet Virolleaud</hi>, Rev. end.</note></hi></l>
<l>21. Prayer for the brick walls of <hi rend='italic'>Ekur</hi> that it
be restored to its place.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>ki-šù-bi-im</hi></l>
<l>22. It is a service of prostrations.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Liturgy of the Cult of Kes
(Nippur Fragments and Ashmolean Prism.)</head>

<p>
Keš and Opis, two closely associated but unlocated southern
cities of Sumer, lay apparently somewhere in the region between
Erech and Šuruppak. So closely were they united that the same
cult of the great mother goddess obtained in both.<note place='foot'>Also Opis was
sometimes called Keš, see CT. 16, 36, 3, <hi rend='italic'>ki-e-ši</hi>, gloss
on the ideogram for Opis.</note> According
to II Raw. 60<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> 26, Innini of Hallab was the queen of Keš. The
Sumerian liturgy, BL. p. 54, names Nintud as the goddess of
this city, but the list of mother goddesses in PSBA. 1911 Pl. XII
calls her by the name Ninharsag,<note place='foot'>For Ninharsag at
Keš, see also SAK. 14 XVIII 6. Another title of the goddess at Keš is
Ninmah, SAK. 237e.</note> where she is associated with
Ninmenna, epithet of the earth mother in Adab a city near
Šuruppak. A fragment, No. 102 in BL., reads her title at Keš
as Aruru. These various epithets all refer to the earth mother
whose principal married type is Ninlil. In fact one liturgy
actually names Ninlil as the goddess of Keš, SBP. 24, 74. On
the other hand, a cult document of the Neo-Babylonian period
names Kallat Ekur, the bride of Ekur, as the goddess of <hi rend='italic'>U-pi-ia</hi>
or Opis, VS. VI. 213, 21.<note place='foot'>Here the god of Opis is given as Igidu, a
form of Nergal. In this late text Opis on the
Tigris at Seleucia is probably intended. The southern Keš and Opis were imitated in Akkad,
at any rate in later times, and Keš was apparently confused with Kiš which gave rise to
a second Kiš in Akkad. The ancient and historical Kiš at Oheimer on the canal
of the Euphrates should not be confused with Kiš corruption for the new Keš near
Seleucia.</note> The bride of Ekur is Ninlil. Thus the
twin cities Keš and Opis of Sumer with their cult of the earth
mother Ninharsag or Nintud were imitated in later times in
Akkad and located on the Tigris where Opis survived into Greek
times (ωπις) and Keš seems to have become confused in writing
with Kiš a famous city near Babylon. At Opis in Akkad a male
satellite <hi rend='italic'>Igi-du</hi> was associated with the mother goddess and we
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
may be safe in assuming that he was borrowed from the original
southern cult.<note place='foot'>The god <hi rend='italic'>Igi-du</hi> of
Keš is identified with Ninurta as were most of the male satellites of the
mother goddesses in various cities. CT. 25, 24 K. 8219, 17+K. 7620, 18,
<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Igi-du</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Nin-urta</hi>.
According to CT. 25, 12, 17 it is one of the titles of Ninurta in Elam. But
in CT. 24, 36, 52 <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Igi-du</hi>
is a form of Nergal, and in the omen text, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Boissier</hi>, DA.
238, 10 he is explained as
<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi></hi>Meslamtaèa, a form of
Nergal.</note> Of the names Ninharsag, Aruru, Nintud,
Ninmah, Innini of Hallab, we are not certain which one applied
especially to Keš and Opis. In any case the liturgy which we
are about to discuss had some special name for the goddess here.
In a refrain which recurs at the end of each melody the psalmists
say that the god of Keš, that is probably Igidu,<note place='foot'>Or perhaps
Negun. See below.</note> was made like
Ašširgi, or Ninurta, and that its goddess was made like Nintud,
hence the <emph>special</emph> name of the mother goddess in this liturgy
cannot have been Nintud.
</p>

<p>
So far as the text of this important liturgy in eight melodies
can be established, it leads to the inference that, like all other
Sumerian choral compositions, the subject is the rehearsal of
sorrows which befell a city and its temple. Here the glories of
Keš, its temple and its gods are recorded in choral song, and the
woes of this city are referred to as symbolic of all human misfortunes.
The name of the temple has not been preserved in
the text. But we know from other liturgies that the temple in
Keš bore the name Uršabba.<note place='foot'>BL. 72, 14. Here
Keš or Kisa is written with the ideogram for Opis.</note>
The queen of the temple Uršabba
is called the mother of Negun, also a title of Ninurta in Elam.<note place='foot'>CT.
25, 12, 23. See SBP. 156, 39.</note>
The close connection between the goddess of Keš and Ninlil
is again revealed, for Negun is the son of Ninlil in the theological
lists, CT. 24, 26, 112. Therefore at Keš we have a reflection of the
Innini-Tammuz cult or the worship of mother and son, mother
goddess Ninlil or Ninharsag, and Igidu or Negun.<note place='foot'>SAK. 118 XXVII
2.</note>
</p>

<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>

<p>
Keš and Opis must have been closely associated with both
Erech and Šuruppak, and of traditional veneration in Sumer.
Keš is mentioned in a list with Ur, Kullab (part of Erech) and
Šuruppak, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Smith</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Miscellaneous
Texts</hi> 26, 5. Gudea speaks of
a part of the temple in Lagash which was pure as Keš and Aratta
(i. e. Šuruppak).<note place='foot'>A temple <hi rend='italic'>é-an-za-kar</hi>
is assigned to Opis in <hi rend='smallcaps'>Poebel</hi>, PBS. V 157, 8
and <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, KL.
199 Rev. I 37 (here without <hi rend='italic'>é</hi>).
This temple can hardly be the one which forms the subject
of the liturgy on the Ashmolean Prism.</note> The various mother goddesses of Eridu,
Kullab, Kêši, Lagaš and Šuruppak are invoked in an incantation,
CT. 16, 36, 1-9. The first melody of the Ashmolean Prism
contains a reference to the horse of Šuruppak.
</p>

<p>
The textual history of this liturgy is interesting. The
major text is written upon a four-sided prism now in the
Ashmolean Museum of Oxford. The object is eight inches high,
four inches wide on each surface and is pierced from top to
bottom at the center by a small hole, so that the liturgy could
be turned on a spindle. The writer published a copy of this
prism or prayer wheel in his <hi rend='italic'>Babylonian Liturgies</hi>. The elucidation
of this exceedingly difficult text was lightened somewhat
by the discovery of a four column tablet in Constantinople,
which originally contained the entire text. It was afterwards
published as No. 23 of my <hi rend='italic'>Historical and Religious Texts</hi>. Since
the edition of these two sources, the Nippur Collection in Philadelphia
has been found to contain several fragments of the same
liturgy. A portion of the redaction on several single column
tablets had been already published by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Radau</hi> in his
<hi rend='italic'>Miscellaneous
Sumerian Texts</hi>, No. 8 (=Ni. 11876), last tablet of the series
containing melodies six, seven, and eight. I failed to detect the
connection of <hi rend='smallcaps'>Radau</hi>'s tablet at the time of the first edition
but referred to it with a rendering in my <hi rend='italic'>Epic of Paradise</hi>, p. 19.
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
Another tablet, also from a single column tablet redaction at
Nippur, has been recovered in Philadelphia, Ni. 8384.<note place='foot'>Published
by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Barton</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Miscellaneous Religious
Texts</hi>.</note> This
text utilized here in transcription contains a section marked
number 4 on that tablet but all the other sources omit it.
Hence this redaction probably contained nine melodies.
The new melody has been inserted between melodies three
and four of the standard text. If evidence did not point
otherwise the editor would have supposed that Ni. 8384
and 11876 belonged to the same tablet. But Ni. 8384 has
melodies four, five and six of its redaction with the catch-line
of the next or its seventh melody which partly duplicates
the Radau tablet. Moreover, these two tablets have not
the same handwriting and differ in color and texture of the
clay. Finally a small fragment, Ni. 14031, contains the end of
the second melody and the beginning of the third on its obverse.
The reverse contains the end of the sixth melody. This small
tablet undoubtedly belongs to the four column tablet in Constantinople.
The two fragments became separated by chance
when the Nippur Collection was divided between Philadelphia
and the Musée Imperial of Turkey. Ni. 14031 will be found in
my <hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Liturgical Texts</hi>, No. 22.
</p>

<p>
Under ordinary circumstances a text for which so many
duplicates exist should have yielded better results than I have
been able to produce. But the contents are still obscure owing
largely to the bad condition of the prism. My first rendering
of the interesting refrain in which I saw a reference to the creation
of man and woman was apparently erroneous. The refrain
refers rather to the creation of the mother goddess of Keš and
to her giving birth to her son Negun.<note place='foot'>A new copy of the
Ashmolean Prism is published in the <hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Assyriologie</hi>, Vol.
XVI.</note>
</p>

<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Col.</hi> I (Lines 1-22 defaced)
</p>

<lg>
<l>...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'>[é ke]š-(ki)-dug-ga    dū-a</hi></l>
<l>23. [Temple] in holy Keš builded.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>[é(?)] ÉN-ḪAR-(ki)-dug-gu dū-a</hi></l>
<l>24. [Temple(?)] in holy <hi rend='italic'>EN-ḪAR</hi> builded.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>[é ...] nun-gim an-na dirig-ga</hi></l>
<l>25. [Temple] like ... <hi rend='italic'>nun</hi>, like  heaven exceeding
all.<note place='foot'>Cf. BA. V 707, 7.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. <hi rend='italic'>[é ...] azag-gim ? -si ri-a</hi></l>
<l>26. [Temple] like the pure ... clothed in</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. <hi rend='italic'>[é] an-na-gim mūš kur-kur-ra</hi></l>
<l>27. [Temple] like heaven the illumination of the lands.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28. <hi rend='italic'>[é ...] tūr-gim ki-a-ta sur-sur-ra</hi></l>
<l>28. [Temple] like ... <hi rend='italic'>tur</hi> in the earth
<hi rend='italic'>founded</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29. <hi rend='italic'>[é ...-]gim mur-du ninda<note place='foot'>Probably for
<hi rend='italic'>gud-NINDA=bîru, mîru</hi>.</note>-gim gù-nun-di<note place='foot'>Var.
<hi rend='italic'>na</hi>.</note></hi></l>
<l>29. [Temple] like ... roaring, like a <hi rend='italic'>young bull</hi> bellowing.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>30. <hi rend='italic'>[é ...] bi-ta lipiš kalam-ma</hi></l>
<l>30. [Temple] in whose ... the hearts of the creatures of the
Land ...<note place='foot'>Some verb seems to be missing here. The construction is
obscure.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31. <hi rend='italic'>[é ...] bi-ta zid Ki-en-gi-ra</hi></l>
<l>31. [Temple] in whose ... the soul of life of Sumer ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32. <hi rend='italic'>[é ...] ib-gal an-e-ri<note place='foot'>So the
prism.</note> uš-sa</hi></l>
<l>32. [Temple], great ... <hi rend='italic'>IB</hi>, attaining unto heaven.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33. <hi rend='italic'>[é ...]-da-gal  an-e<note place='foot'>Var.
<hi rend='italic'>ni</hi>.</note> uš-sa</hi></l>
<l>33. [Temple], great ... <hi rend='italic'>da</hi>, attaining unto heaven.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>34. <hi rend='italic'>[é ...] gal  an-e  uš-sa</hi></l>
<l>34. [Temple], great ..., attaining unto heaven.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>35. <hi rend='italic'>[é ...] -na [an-e] uš-sa</hi></l>
<l>35. [Temple ...], attaining unto heaven.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Col.</hi> II
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>... an-ki ...</hi></l>
<l>1. ... heaven and earth ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>... abzu ...</hi></l>
<l>2. ... of the nether-sea ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>é an-ni(?) šu-[    ]</hi></l>
<l>3. Temple which Anu ...</l>
</lg>

<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-lil-li zag-šú
...</hi></l>
<l>4. Enlil above all ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>ama <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-tud
eš-[bar-kin ... ]</hi></l>
<l>5. The mother, Nintud oracles ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>é Keš-ki ... na ...</hi></l>
<l>6. Temple in Keš ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>ÉN-ḪAR-(ki)<note place='foot'>Variant Constple.
omits <hi rend='italic'>ki</hi>.</note>-gim rib-ba<note place='foot'>Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>ki-gim rib-ba</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>kima irṣitim šûtuḳat</hi>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Delitzsch</hi>, AL<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> 134,
5. <hi rend='italic'>KAL</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>ri-ib</hi>) =
<hi rend='italic'>šûtuḳu</hi>,
Chicago Syllabar 287; <hi rend='italic'>rib</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>šutuḳḳu</hi>,
CT. 19, 11, 12; <hi rend='italic'>nam-kalag-ga-ni rib-ba</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>dannussu šûtuḳat</hi>,
IV Raw. 24<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> 48; <hi rend='italic'>ana-gim ki-gim
rib-ba-zu-ne</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>ša kima šamê u irṣitim šûtugata</hi>, SBP. 250, 6.
See also <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ebeling</hi>, KTA. 32, 5,
<hi rend='italic'>rib-ba</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>šu-tu-ḳu</hi>.</note>
galu ši-in-[ga-an-túm-mu]</hi></l>
<l>7. Like <hi rend='italic'>EN-ḪAR</hi> it has been made surpassing; verily man has
brought solicitude for it.<note place='foot'>The meaning is obscure. For
the suggested rendering cf. <hi rend='italic'>en me-a túm-ma</hi>, the lord who
cares for the decrees, SAK. 204, 6.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>ur-sag-bi <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Áš-šir-gí-gim
rib-ba</hi></l>
<l>8. Its hero like Ašširgi has been</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>ama ši-in-ga-an<note place='foot'>For this emphatic
verbal prefix cf. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Delitzsch</hi>,
AL<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>, 134, 5; <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>,
KL. 68 Rev. 24.</note>-ù-tud</hi></l>
<l>9. made surpassing; the mother<note place='foot'>I. e. Nintud. For
<hi rend='italic'>ummu</hi> in the sense of <q>mother goddess</q> note CT. 16, 36, 1-9
where the various mothers of Eridu, Kullab, Keš, Lagash and Šuruppak are invoked. The
reference here is undoubtedly to Ninlil as the mother of Negun, SBP. 156, 39.</note>
verily has borne him.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>nin-bi <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-tud-gim
rib-ba-ra a-ba<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>a-ba</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>arka</hi>, and then. The same phrase in BE. 31, 2,
7 and for <hi rend='italic'>aba</hi>, see especially <hi rend='italic'>Sum. Gr.</hi>
§ 241. <hi rend='italic'>er-du(ģ)</hi> probably variant of <hi rend='italic'>er-du</hi>
= <hi rend='italic'>damāmu</hi>.</note> er-mu-ni-in-duģ</hi></l>
<l>10. Its lady like Nintud has been made surpassing. And then wailing began.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>gú     2     kam-[ma-ám]</hi></l>
<l>11. It is the second song.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>é an-šú ģud-da ki-šú ...<note place='foot'>Ni. 14031
in PBS. X No. 22 has as the verb the sign <hi rend='italic'>dug</hi> written
five times, as also the prism.</note></hi></l>
<l>12. Temple, in heaven resplendent, in earth ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>é an-šú ... ki-šú ...</hi></l>
<l>13. Temple, in heaven ..., in earth ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>é an-šú siḳḳa<note place='foot'>Restored from the
variant Cstple. Rev. I 10.</note> ki-šú udu-[gim ... ...]</hi></l>
<l>14. Temple, in heaven (<hi rend='italic'>like</hi>) a wild goat, on earth like a
sheep ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>é an-šú ... ki-šú dár-[bar-gim ...]</hi></l>
<l>15. Temple, in heaven (<hi rend='italic'>like</hi>) ..., in earth like a roe ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>é an-šú ... gim ... ki-šú dár-bar-gim ...</hi></l>
<l>16. Temple, in heaven like ..., in earth like a roe ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>é an-šú muš-gim sîg-ga ki-šu babbar-gim za-e laģ-[laģ?]</hi></l>
<l>17. Temple, in heaven like a dragon gleaming, on earth like the sunlight thou
shinest.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>é an-šú babbar-gim è-a ki-šu
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nannar-gim ...</hi></l>
<l>18. Temple, in heaven like the sun arising, in earth like the new moon ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>é an-šú kur-ra ki-šu idim-ma</hi></l>
<l>19. Temple, in heaven shining,<note place='foot'>So?
<hi rend='italic'>kur = napāḫu</hi>, better than my former rendering of this
passage.</note> on earth loud crying.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>idim</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>šegû, nadāru</hi> (cf. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Thompson</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Reports</hi> 82, 6 with 108, 5), refers to the rumbling of the
great gates of the temple.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. <hi rend='italic'>é an-ki 3 gu-ma-bi na-nam</hi></l>
<l>20. Of the temple of heaven and earth three are its attendants.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>ÉN-ḪAR-(ki) gim rib-ba galu ši-in-ga-an-túm-mu</hi></l>
<l>21. Like <hi rend='italic'>EN-ḪAR</hi> it has been made surpassing; verily man
has brought solicitude for it.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>ur-sag-bi <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Áš-šir-gí-gim
rib-ba-[ra]</hi></l>
<l>22. Its hero like Ašširgi has been made surpassing; the mother</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'>[ama] ši-in-ga-an-ù-tud</hi></l>
<l>23. verily has borne him.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>[nin-bi] <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-tud-gim
rib-ba-ra a-ba er-mu-ni-in-duģ</hi></l>
<l>24. Its lady like Nintud has been made surpassing. And then wailing began.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>[gú] 3-kam-ma-[ám]</hi></l>
<l>25. It is the third section.</l>
</lg>

<p>
8384.
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>[é- ...] ní-gal-ar an-ni mu-maģ sá</hi></l>
<l>1. [Temple ...] in  splendor blazing, which Anu with a far-famed name has named.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>[è ...]-gal <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-lil-li
nam-ma-ni gal tar-ri</hi></l>
<l>2. [Temple ...] great, whose fate Enlil has grandly decreed.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>[é]á-nun-gál <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>A-nun-ge-ne
kalam sigi(?)<note place='foot'>Br. 2729? Cf. R <hi rend='italic'>(si-gi)
= ḳaḳḳabu</hi>, CT. 18, 49, 4.</note> lám(?)-mu</hi></l>
<l>3. [Temple] ... of the Anunnaki, in the Land <hi rend='italic'>starlike
gleaming</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>é ki-dúr im-dúb-bu<note place='foot'>Same phrase
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>Clay</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Miscel</hi>. 31, 33.</note>
dingir gal-gal-e-ne</hi></l>
<l>4. Temple, peaceful dwelling place of the great gods.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>é an-ki-bi-da giš-ģar-bi ni-ģar me el šu-ba-e-tag</hi></l>
<l>5. Oh temple whose design in heaven and earth has been planned, thou art possessed of
pure decrees.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>é kalam ki-gar-ra zag-gar-ra uš-sa</hi></l>
<l>6. Temple erected in the Land, where stand the chapels of the gods.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>é-kur ģe-gál ka-zal ud-zal-zal-li</hi></l>
<l>7. Mountain house, radiant with abundance and festivity.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>é <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-ģar-sag-gà
zi-kalam-ma ki-bi-šú gar</hi></l>
<l>8. Temple in whose place Ninharsag has instituted the breath of life of Sumer.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>é-ģar-sag-gal šu-luģ-ģa túm-ma nig-nam-ma-ni
ni<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>ni</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>nu</hi>;
cf. SBP. 138, 22, <hi rend='italic'>ni-kuš-ù</hi>; <hi rend='smallcaps'>Poebel</hi>,
PBS. V 26, 10.</note>-kúr</hi></l>
<l>9. Great mountain house, made worthy of the rituals of purification, of its
possessions nought changes.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>é ... da-nu ka-áš-bar nu-gà-gà</hi></l>
<l>10. Temple ... ceases not to render decision.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>è ... kalam-dagal-šú lá-a</hi></l>
<l>11. Temple ... unto the wide Land bearing.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>[é] kalam šár ù-tud numun giš-isimu tuk-tuk</hi></l>
<l>12. [Temple] causing the multitudes of the Land to produce offspring, causing
the seed to send forth sprouts.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>[é] lugal ù-tud nam kalam-ma tar-ri</hi></l>
<l>13. Temple that gives birth to king, decreeing the fate of the Land.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>[é] bár-bár kar su-ḳin-dúr-bi ag-dé</hi></l>
<l>14. ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>ÉN-ḪAR-(ki)-gim rib-ba galu ši-in-ga-an-túm-mu</hi></l>
<l>15. Like <hi rend='italic'>ÉN-ḪAR</hi> it has been made surpassing; verily
man has wrought solicitude for it.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>ur-sag-bi <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Áš-šir-gí-gim
rib-ba ama ši-in-ga-ám-ù-tud</hi></l>
<l>16. Its hero like Ašširgi has been made surpassing; the mother verily has borne
him.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>nin-bi <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-tud-gim
rib-ba-ra a-ba er-mu-ni-in-duģ</hi></l>
<l>17. Its lady like Nintud has been made surpassing. And then wailing began.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>18. [<hi rend='italic'>gú</hi> 4]<hi rend='italic'>-kam-ma-ám</hi></l>
<l>18. It is the fourth section.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Ashmolean Prism, Col. II</head>

<lg>
<l>26. <hi rend='italic'>[uru]<note place='foot'>So on Var. Cstple. II 6.</note>-in-ga-ám
uru-in-ga-ám šag-bi a-ba a-mu-un-zu<note place='foot'>First example of
the verb <hi rend='italic'>zu</hi> strengthened by augment
<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>; cf. <hi rend='italic'>a-ru</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>a-sil</hi> in <hi rend='italic'>Babyloniaca</hi> II 96.</note></hi></l>
<l>26. It is a city, it is a city! Its secrets who shall understand?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. <hi rend='italic'>é Keš-ki uru-in-ga-ám šag-bi a-ba a-mu-un-zu</hi></l>
<l>27. The temple of Keš is a city! Its secrets who shall understand?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28. <hi rend='italic'>šag-bi-a ur-sag ur-sag-e-ne si-mu-un-si-di-e-ne</hi></l>
<l>28. Within it the heroic ones administrate.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29. <hi rend='italic'>eš-bar-ḳin-dùg-ga šu-gal mu-un-dú-dú<note place='foot'>Cf.
Gudea, Cyl. A 10, 18.</note></hi></l>
<l>29. The oracles proclaimed grandly it executes.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>30. <hi rend='italic'>é-e gud-udu<note place='foot'>Semitic
<hi rend='italic'>ṣênu</hi>? Cf. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ebeling</hi>, KTA. No. 4
Rev. 13.</note>-dam gud-ám-ma-gur-ri</hi>(?)<hi rend='italic'>-en</hi></l>
<l>30.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31. <hi rend='italic'>?-e tum-ma-ám luģ-luģ-</hi> ...</l>
<l>31.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32. <hi rend='italic'>é-e gud-šár-ra-ám<note place='foot'>Var. Cstple.
<hi rend='italic'>an</hi>.</note> al-dúg-[ga?]</hi></l>
<l>32.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33. <hi rend='italic'>è-e udu-šár-ra-ám al-dúg-[ga?]</hi></l>
<l>33.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>34. <hi rend='italic'>giš-KU-LIL(?)-ne<note place='foot'>Read
<hi rend='italic'>ge-ne</hi>? Ni. 8384
<hi rend='italic'>ge</hi>(?)<hi rend='italic'>-e-ne</hi>.</note>
gú-LIL-ma-ám gál-li</hi> ...</l>
<l>34.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>35. <hi rend='italic'>giš-KU-da<note place='foot'>Ni. 8384 
<hi rend='italic'>dam</hi>.</note> ... gùr</hi> ...</l>
<l>35.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Col. III</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>giš</hi>A-TU-GAB-LIŠ-dam
an-da-PI-PI-SAL(?)</hi> ...</l>
<l>2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>ģar-sag-da mă-a<note place='foot'>So on 8384.</note>
an-da-sîg-sîg-[ga-ám?]</hi></l>
<l>3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>EN-ḪAR-(ki)-gim rib-ba galu ši-in-ga-túm-mu</hi></l>
<l>4. Like EN-HAR it has been made surpassing; verily man has wrought solicitude for
it.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. ur-sag-bi <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Aš-šir-gi-gim rib-ba ama
ši-in-ga-an-ù-tud</l>
<l>5. Its hero like Ašširgi has been made surpassing; the mother verily has borne him.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>nin-bi <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-tud-gim
rib-ba-ra a-ba er mu-ni-in-duģ</hi></l>
<l>6. Its lady like Nintud has been made surpassing. And then wailing began.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>[gú<note place='foot'>Var. Cstple.
<hi rend='italic'>é</hi>. See below line 21 and BL. 88 n. 4.</note> 4-kam-ma-ám</hi></l>
<l>7. Section four<note place='foot'>Fifth section on Ni. 8384.</note> it is.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>8. ...</l>
<l>8. ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>é</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>é</hi> [  ]<hi rend='italic'>-la né</hi> [  ]
<hi rend='italic'>tu<note place='foot'>First sign on Ni. 8384 Rev. 1.</note>
[  ] ur</hi> [  ]</l>
<l>10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>šag-bi-a ur-sag ur-sag-e-ne si-mu-un-si-di-e-ne</hi></l>
<l>11. Within it the heroic ones administrate.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-ģar-sag-gà
ušumgal-ám šag-ki im-</hi>[    ]</l>
<l>12. Ninḫarsag <hi rend='italic'>placed</hi> it in the bosom of the
earth like a python.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-tud ama-gal-la
tud-tud mu-un</hi>-[    ]</l>
<l>13. Nintud the great mother ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Šul-pa-è-a
pa-te-si-ge nam-en-na mu</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>14. Šulpae the priest king lordship ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Áš-šir-gi<note
place='foot'>Ni. 8384 <hi rend='italic'>gí</hi></note>
ur-sag-gà AB<note place='foot'>Same sign on Var. Cstple. But Ni. 8384 has a
sign apparently related to the difficult sign which I assimilated to
Br. 4930 in AJSL. 33, 48. The sign on Ni. 8384 recurs in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, KL. 35 II 5.</note>-mu</hi>-[...]</l>
<l>15. Ašširgi, the champion, ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Urumaš
ligir-gal-ám<note place='foot'>Var. Ni. 8384 <hi rend='italic'>gal-e</hi>; Var.
Cstple. <hi rend='italic'>gal-la</hi>. According to CT. 24, 10, 8 the throne bearer of
Enlil, but in 24, 26, 124 a <hi rend='italic'>ligir-gal</hi> in the attendance of the
mother goddess.</note> edin-na-an<note place='foot'>Ni. 8384
<hi rend='italic'>edin-na</hi>; Var. Cstple. <hi rend='italic'>edin</hi>.</note>
mu-da-an</hi>-[...]</l>
<l>16. Urumaš great prince in the (heavenly) plain has ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>é-e siḳḳa lu-lim<note place='foot'>Both variants
add <hi rend='italic'>e</hi>.</note> gú-ám-ma-gur-ri<note place='foot'>Var. of
<hi rend='italic'>gú-gar</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>puḫḫuru</hi>. See BL. 10,
30.</note></hi></l>
<l>17. The temple assembles the rams and bucks.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>ÉN-ḪAR-(ki)-gim rib-ba galu ši-in-ga-an-túm-mu</hi></l>
<l>18. Like EN-HAR it has been made surpassing; verily man has wrought solicitude for
it.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>ur-sag-bi
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Áš-šir-gi<note place='foot'>Vars.
omit <hi rend='italic'>gim</hi>.</note>-gim rib-ba</hi></l>
<l>19. Its hero like Ašširgi has been made surpassing; the mother</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. <hi rend='italic'>ama ši-in-ga-a-an-ù-tud</hi></l>
<l>20. verily has borne him.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>nin-bi <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-tud-gim
rib-ba-ra<note place='foot'>Ni. 8384 omits <hi rend='italic'>ra</hi>.</note>
a-ba er-mu-ni-in-duģ</hi></l>
<l>21. Its lady like Nintud has been made surpassing. And then wailing began.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>é 5-kam-ma-ám</hi></l>
<l>22. It is the fifth<note place='foot'>Sixth on Ni. 8384.</note> section.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'>é ud-gim ki-gal-la gub-ba</hi></l>
<l>23. The temple like the sun on the vast foundation stands.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>am-laģ-laģ-gim edin-na sūg-sūg-[gi]</hi></l>
<l>24. Like a white bull on the landscape it reposes.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. [    ] <hi rend='italic'>e gar-ra é</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>25.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. [    ]-<hi rend='italic'>bi-ta</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>26.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. [    -]<hi rend='italic'>ta</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>27.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28-30.</l>
<l>(28-30 illegible or lost on all the variants.<note place='foot'>Lines
29-IV 4 are partially restored from Ni. 14031.</note>)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31. [    ] <hi rend='italic'>ra</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>31.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32. [    ] <hi rend='italic'>gar nu</hi> [    ]</l>
<l>32.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33. [    ] <hi rend='italic'>an-šár ki-šar</hi></l>
<l>33.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>34. [    ]<hi rend='italic'>bi la-ģa-ma ki-uš-sa</hi></l>
<l>34.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>35. [    ] <hi rend='italic'>na-ra-ab Uri-(ki)-ka keš-du</hi></l>
<l>35.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>36. <hi rend='italic'>ÉN-ḪAR-(ki)-gim rib-ba<note place='foot'>First signs on
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Radau</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Miscel</hi>. No. 8 = Ni. 11876.</note>
galu ši-in-ga-an-túm-mu</hi></l>
<l>36. Like ÉN-HAR it has been made surpassing; verily man has brought solicitude for
it.</l>
</lg>

<p>
Col. IV
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>ur-sag-bi <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Áš-šir-gí-gim
rib-ba-ra</hi></l>
<l>1. Its hero like Ašširgi has been made surpassing; the mother</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>ama-a<note place='foot'>So Ni. 11876.</note>
ši-in-ga-an-ù-tud</hi></l>
<l>2. verily has borne him.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. nin-bi <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-tud-gim rib-ba-ra a-ba
er-mu-ni-in-duģ</l>
<l>3. Its lady like Nintud has been made surpassing. And then wailing began.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>é<note place='foot'>So apparently Ni. 11876.</note>
6-kam-ma ám</hi></l>
<l>4. It is the sixth section.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>é-azag LU-bi é<note place='foot'>Text certain.
Not <hi rend='italic'>NUN</hi>.</note></hi>....</l>
<l>5. The sacred temple whose (?) is....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>é-Keš-(ki)-azag LU-bi é<note place='foot'>See last
footnote.</note></hi></l>
<l>6. The sacred temple of Keš whose ? is....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>é-a en-bi
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>A-nun-na-me-eš</hi></l>
<l>7. In the temple whose high priests are the Anunnaki,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>nu-éš-bi dim-é-an-na-me-eš<note place='foot'>Var. Cstple.
<hi rend='italic'>en</hi>.</note></hi></l>
<l>8. Whose sacrificial priests are the <hi rend='italic'>dim</hi> of Eanna,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>kisal-e lugal-bur-ra-ám mu-un-gub</hi></l>
<l>9. The aisle ... treads.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>en-dug šag túg-lal nam-mi-in-lal</hi></l>
<l>10. (The temple) unto which a beneficent lord has shown solicitude....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>a-tu-e umun
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-ki NE-GAB in-</hi>[    ]</l>
<l>11. The libator(?), lord Enki....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>tu-e a-ŭr(?)<note place='foot'>Radau's
copy has <hi rend='italic'>ḲIN</hi>.</note>-a<note place='foot'>Var.
<hi rend='italic'>a-an</hi>.</note> mu-    e-    gub</hi></l>
<l>12. The baptizer ... treads thee.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>làl a-šag-ga ki-azag-ga-ám mi-<note place='foot'>Ni.
11876 has <hi rend='italic'>làl-e ki-azag-ga nam-mi-in-KU</hi>?</note></hi>...</l>
<l>13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>en isimu-e<note place='foot'>Ni. 11876
omits <hi rend='italic'>e</hi>. This text proves that in
the ideogram Br. 1202 the gloss <hi rend='italic'>isimu</hi> belongs
properly to the first two signs only and that the
original reading was <hi rend='italic'>isimu-abkal</hi>. See especially
CT. 12, 16, 34 (<hi rend='italic'>i-si-mu</hi>) =
<hi rend='italic'>PAP-sîg</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>usmû</hi>.
In the later period <hi rend='italic'>abkal</hi> was apparently not pronounced
and the whole ideogram was rendered by <hi rend='italic'>isimu</hi>.</note>
abkal ubar-e-ne tù ki-ám-ma-gál-li-eš [    ]šeš-a-ni
SU-mu-un-sīg-gi-ne<note place='foot'>This line is not on the prism.</note></hi></l>
<l>14. The lord Isimu, the councilor....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. [    ] <hi rend='italic'>RU URU RU mu-ni-ib-bi-ne</hi></l>
<l>15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. [    ]<hi rend='italic'>-ma-ge gig-ga<note place='foot'>Ni. 11876
<hi rend='italic'>ga-a-an</hi>. Cstple. Var. <hi rend='italic'>gig</hi> simply.</note>
mi-ni-ib-za [    ] á-lal-e gù-ģu mi-ni-ib-bi</hi></l>
<l>16. ... in sorrow abounds. ... the <hi rend='italic'>bound</hi> cry like birds
(?)[7]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. [    ]?<hi rend='italic'>-ra-ge sūģ-sūģ mi-ni-ib-za [    ] dug-gi
si-ģa-ba-ni-ib di</hi></l>
<l>17. ... in desolation abounds. ... may direct aright.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>

<lg>
<l>18. [    ] <hi rend='italic'>ka-zal-bi  al-dug</hi></l>
<l>18. Of ... its joy was sweet.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. [    -]<hi rend='italic'>dug ka-zal-bi al-dug</hi></l>
<l>19. Of ... its joy was sweet.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. [    ]-<hi rend='italic'>zal-bi a-mu-un-KU</hi></l>
<l>20.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. [    ]-<hi rend='italic'>ģar-sag-gà nin-bi[?-] bi ám-mu-un-KU(?)</hi></l>
<l>21.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>ÉN-ḪAR-(ki)-gim rib-ba galu ši-in-ga-an-túm-mu</hi></l>
<l>22. Like EN-HAR it has been made surpassing; verily man has brought solicitude for
it.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'>ur-sag-bi <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Áš-šir-gi-gim
rib-ba ama ši-in-ga-an-ù-tud</hi></l>
<l>23. Its hero like Ašširgi has been made surpassing; verily the mother has borne
him.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>nin-bi <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-tud-gim
rib-ba-ṛa a-ba er-mu-ni-in-duģ</hi></l>
<l>24. Its lady like Nintud has been made surpassing. And then wailing began.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>[é(?)<note place='foot'>Or <hi rend='italic'>gú</hi>.</note>]
7-kam-ma-ám</hi></l>
<l>25. It is the seventh section.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Third Tablet of the Series <q>The Exalted One
Who Walketh</q> (<hi rend='italic'>e-lum didara</hi>)
(No. 13)</head>

<p>
The series <hi rend='italic'>elum didara</hi> is entered in the Assyrian liturgical
catalogue, IV Raw. 53<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> 8, and the first tablet of this Enlil
liturgy has been found in the Berlin collection and published by
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reisner</hi>,
SBH. No. 25.<note place='foot'>I edited this tablet in SBP.
120-123 where I erroneously assigned it to the Enlil series
<hi rend='italic'>ame baranara</hi>. The tablet has been
partially restored from <hi rend='smallcaps'>Meek</hi>, No. 11. The first two melodies
of <hi rend='italic'>elume didara</hi> are used in the
Enlil liturgy <hi rend='italic'>elum gudsun</hi> near the end just before the titular
litany and have been re-edited above pp. 300-2 in the
edition of the <hi rend='italic'>elum gudsun</hi> series.</note>
The Berlin tablet belongs to a great
Babylonian temple library of the Greek period redacted by a
family of liturgists descendants of Sin-ibni. A fragment of the
same first tablet of another Babylonian copy has been found,
BM. 81-7-27, 203.<note place='foot'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Meek</hi>, No. 11 in BA.
X pt. 1.</note> The catch line of tablet two is lost on
SBH. 25 and no part of tablet two has been identified. In 1914
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
I copied BM. 78239 (=88-5-12, 94) the upper half of a large
tablet carrying according to the colophon ninety-six Sumerian
lines. The number of lines provided with an interlinear translation
on this fragment is only two, which increases the actual
number of lines to ninety-eight. Probably a few more should
be added for Semitic lines on the lost portion. This tablet,
also from a Babylonian redaction, belongs to an edition made
by another school of liturgists and contains tablet three of
<hi rend='italic'>elum didara</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The third tablet of <hi rend='italic'>elum didara</hi> began with
a melody <hi rend='italic'>nin-ri
nin-ri gû-am-me</hi> to the mother goddess Bau (I. 2), who in line 7 is
identified with Nanâ. Lines 3-6 introduce by interpolation other
local forms of the mother goddess, as a concession to cities whose
liturgists succeeded in inserting these lines before the canon of
sacred songs were closed in the Isin period. Hence Babylon is
favored by a reference to Zarpanit in line 3; Barsippa by a reference
to Tašmet in lines 4-6. Bau or Gula wails for Nippur whose
destruction is here attributed to the moon-god, Sin. The
introduction of a long passage to the moon-god in the weeping
mother melody of an Enlil liturgy is unusual. The entire passage
reflects the phraseology and ideas of the well-known Sumerian
hymn to the moon-god <hi rend='italic'>magur azag anna</hi>.<note place='foot'>SBP.
296.</note> The composer desiring
to utilize these fine lines makes a setting for them by describing
Sin as the god who visited Nippur with wrath, regardless of
the inconsistency of placing such a passage in an Enlil song
service which attributed the sorrows of Nippur to Enlil himself.
</p>

<p>
According to the catch line of tablet two of the Ninurta
liturgy <hi rend='italic'>gud-nim kurra</hi> the third tablet of that series began by
the same melody as tablet three of the <hi rend='italic'>elum
didara</hi>.<note place='foot'>SBP. 236.</note> It is probable
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
that the first melody of tablet three of both series was
identical. Melodies are always identified by their first lines and
when these agree we assume that the entire melodies are
identical. Since the musicians referred to all melodies by their
first lines it was manifestly impossible to begin two different
melodies with the same line. But tablet three of the weeping
mother liturgy <hi rend='italic'>muten nu-nunuz-gim</hi>
begins its first melody<note place='foot'>SBP. 140.</note> <hi rend='italic'>nin-ri
nin-ri gù-ám</hi>, etc., otherwise both melodies differ completely.
This is the first known of example of two different melodies
bearing the same title. It is curious indeed that an Enlil, a
Ninurta and a <foreign rend='italic'>mater dolorosa</foreign> series all begin their third
tablets in the same manner.
</p>

<p>
The obverse of BM. 78239 breaks away before the end of
the melody <hi rend='italic'>nin-ri ninri gú-ám-me</hi>. Here forty-five Sumerian
lines are lost; one or two melodies at least stood in this break.
For the last passage on tablet three, the scribe borrows the first
melody of the Ninurta series <hi rend='italic'>gud-nim kurra</hi>.<note place='foot'>SBP.
226=SBH. No. 18.</note> The litanies which
begin these melodies or series of addresses to Ninurta differ
greatly in the two redactions. Since SBH. No. 18 belongs to a
Ninurta series the addresses therein are much more extensive.
The composer of the Enlil series <hi rend='italic'>elum didara</hi> obviously introduced
this irrelevant melody to obtain the fine passage to the weeping
mother, Rev. 10-21 on BM. 78239. These lines are lost on the
Berlin text SBH. No. 18. On the whole the liturgy <hi rend='italic'>elum didara</hi>
is more inconsistent in the development of ideas than any song
service of which extensive portions are known. Only tablets
one and three are as yet identified and neither of these is much
more than half complete.
</p>

<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>ru-ba-tum (rubatum) ši-si-it âli i-šes-si ina lal-la-ra-ti</hi></l>
<l>The princess, the princess, in misery shouts the wailing of the
city.<note place='foot'>The first line, together with
its Semitic translation, is identical with the first line of the third
tablet of the series <hi rend='italic'>muten nu-nunuz-gim</hi>,
see SBP. 140. Otherwise the melodies differ.</note></l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>nin-ri nin-ri gú-ám-me úru in-ga-ám-me ù-li-li</hi></l>
<l>1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>a gašan-mu nu-nunuz-šág-ga   ù</hi></l>
<l>2. How long my queen, the pious woman, in misery?<note place='foot'>The refrain
<hi rend='italic'>ù-li-li</hi> apparently provides an incomplete sentence.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>é-gí-a é-sag-il-la<note place='foot'>Cf. SBH. No.
84, 13, there a title of the river goddess.</note>    ù</hi></l>
<l>3. The bride of Esagila in misery?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>dumu-sag <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Uraša-a
ù</hi></l>
<l>4. First born daughter of Urasha in misery?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>dumu-sag é-i-be- <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>A-nu-um
ù</hi></l>
<l>5. First born daughter of the temple Ibe-Anum in misery?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>gašan-gù-ur-a-sĭg ud-lal-a-ge ù</hi></l>
<l>6. The obedient queen, she the ..., in misery?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>gašan-mu <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Na-na-a
ù</hi></l>
<l>7. My queen Nana in misery?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>é-zu é-zu-šú ù</hi></l>
<l>8. (How long) shall thy temple for thy temple in misery be?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>uru-zu uru-zu-šú ù</hi></l>
<l>9. Thy city for thy city in misery be?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>dam-zu dam-zu-šú ù</hi></l>
<l>10. Thy wives for thy wives in misery be?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>dumu-zu dumu-zu-šú ù</hi></l>
<l>11. Thy sons for thy sons in misery be?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>še-ib-šú še-ib-gí-gí ù</hi></l>
<l>12. (How long) for the brick walls shall the brick walls restored wail?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>saģar-šú saģar-gí-gí<note place='foot'>Lines 10-13
form a duplicate of SBH. No. 25, Rev. 2-5 = SBP. 122.</note> ù</hi></l>
<l>13. For the dust shall the restored dust wail?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>si-mă<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>si-mă</hi>,
literally <hi rend='italic'>karnānu</hi>, the horned, referring
to the new-moon. The variant SBP. 296, 1
has <hi rend='italic'>má-gúr</hi>, the crescent boat. Undoubtedly
<hi rend='italic'>má-gúr</hi> should be rendered by <hi rend='italic'>nannaru</hi> in this
passage.</note> azag an-na še-ir-ma-al-la ní-te-na dirig-ga-zu-dé za-e
dirig-ga-zu-dé</hi></l>
<l>14. Bright horned light of heaven mighty of itself, in thy excellence, yea thou in
thy excellence,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>na-an-na-ru el-lu ša ša-me-e e-ṭil ra-ma-ni-šu ina
šu-tu-ru-ti-ka at-tam</hi></l>
<l>15.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>a-a <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nannar
si-mă azag an-na še-ir-ma-al- a ní-te-na</hi></l>
<l>16. O father Nannar bright horned light of heaven, mighty of
itself, (in thy excellence, yea thou in thy excellence),</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>a-a <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nannar
umun-e an-šár</hi></l>
<l>17. Father Nannar, lord of all the heavens,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>umun <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nannar
umun <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Aš-ìm-ür-ra<note place='foot'>See
BL. p. 132.</note></hi></l>
<l>18. Lord Nannar, lord of the rising light,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>umun gu-la galu nin-ģul-ma-al-la uru-zu ní-te-en-na
še-ir-ma-al-la ní-te-en-na</hi></l>
<l>19. Great lord, who himself has  wrought evil to thy city,<note place='foot'>I. e.
Sin himself is the author of Nippur's sorrows.</note> mighty of himself,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. <hi rend='italic'>uru-zu Nippur-(ki) galu nin-ģul-ma-al-la uru-zu</hi></l>
<l>20. As for thy city Nippur, he who has wrought evil to thy city,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>nigin kalam-ma-zu á-si ma-ni-ib-bi</hi></l>
<l>21. All thy Land....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>[uru?] kalam-ma-da-zu gig-ga-an-na-ag-eš</hi></l>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>Thy city</hi> and land are afflicted with woe.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. [   ] <hi rend='italic'>zu-gà<note place='foot'>Glossed
<hi rend='italic'>ki</hi>.</note> (galu) a-ba
an-lăģ<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>LAḪ</hi>; transcription and
interpretation uncertain.</note>-eš</hi></l>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'>In</hi> thy ... and thy ... the scribes are driven away.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. [   ] <hi rend='italic'>zu-gà pag-da<note place='foot'>Hereby is
established the reading <hi rend='italic'>pa(g)-dà = mûdu, kapdu</hi>. Probably a kind
of augurer.</note> ma-an-lá-lal-la-aģ(?)<note place='foot'>Probably tautological
writing for <hi rend='italic'>lallaģ = itabbulu</hi>, Voc. Hittite
7509.</note>-eš</hi></l>
<l>24. In thy ... and thy ... the augurers are exiled.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. ... <hi rend='italic'>zu ba-ni-ib-gul</hi></l>
<l>25. Thy ... is destroyed.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. ... <hi rend='italic'>zu ba-ni-ib-sĭg-sĭg</hi></l>
<l>26.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. ... <hi rend='italic'>ḪUL-AŠ-A</hi> (gloss) <hi rend='italic'>e-ga ib</hi> ...</l>
<l>27.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28. ... <hi rend='italic'>A-AN ḪUL ... e-ga ib</hi> ...</l>
<l>28.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29. ...</l>
<l>29. ...</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reverse</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>[gū-ud nim] kur-ra [mu-lu ta-zu mu-un-zu]</hi></l>
<l>1. Exalted hero of the world, doth any one comprehend thy form?<note place='foot'>Cf.
the first melody of the Ninurta series
<hi rend='italic'>gū-ud nim kur-ra</hi>; see SBP. 226; BL. No. 9 and
SBH. 40.</note></l>
</lg>

<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>[kar-ra-]du ša-ku-u ša ma-a-tim kat-tuk
[man-nu i-lam-mad]</hi></l>
<l>2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>alim-ma    umun ur-sag-gal</hi></l>
<l>3. Honored one, lord, great champion.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>ur-sag-gal umun si
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-ul-lil-lá-ge</hi></l>
<l>4. Great champion, lord, light of Enlil.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>alim-ma    abil é-kur-ra</hi></l>
<l>5. Honored one, son of Ekur.<note place='foot'>Similar passages have
<hi rend='italic'>é-šár-ra</hi> (SBP. 226, 8; SBH. 40, 8) chapel of Ninlil in Ekur (SBP.
221 n. 7).</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>ur-sag-gal  umun é-šu-me-DU<note place='foot'>Temple of
Ninurta in Nippur. A syllabary recently published by
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Scheil</hi> (RA. 14, 174 I. 7)
explains the name by <hi rend='italic'>bit gi-mir
par-ṣi hammu</hi>, Temple which executes the totality of decrees.
Note, however, the epithet <hi rend='italic'>é i-dé-ila</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>bit niš înê</hi>, House of the lifting of the eyes, SBP. 208,
11.</note></hi></l>
<l>6. Great champion, lord of Ešume-<hi rend='italic'>du</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>umun é-šag-maģ-a umun-e é-i-be-šu-gúd</hi></l>
<l>7. Lord of Ešamaḫ, lord of E-ibe-šugud.<note place='foot'>In any case an
epithet of the temple of <hi rend='italic'>Urta</hi> in Dilbat,
<hi rend='italic'>Ibe-<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ilu</hi>Anum</hi>.
For this reading <hi rend='italic'>I-be</hi>
see vars. <hi rend='italic'>I-bi</hi>, Im-bi, BL. p. 134. The word
<hi rend='italic'>ibi</hi> is probably Sumerian for <hi rend='italic'>igi</hi>, and
shows that the phonetic rendering <hi rend='italic'>i-de</hi> is erroneous.
The dialectic pronunciation of <hi rend='italic'>igi</hi> was
<hi rend='italic'>ibe</hi> and despite the Semitic variant
<hi rend='italic'>imbi</hi> the name is apparently Sumerian
<hi rend='italic'>Ibe-Anu</hi>, Temple of the eye of Anu.
Here <hi rend='italic'>šu-gúd</hi> is an epithet for Anu, i. e. the lofty.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>umun sukkal-maģ-di<note place='foot'>See also SBH. 132, 46;
BL. No. 56 Rev. 31; <hi rend='smallcaps'>Craig</hi>, RT. 20, 30.
This text has a variant <hi rend='italic'>a</hi>
for <hi rend='italic'>di</hi>.</note>
gal-ukkin <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nusku-ge</hi></l>
<l>8. Lord, great messenger, the herald Nusku.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Maš-tab-ba
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Lugal-gĭr-ra</hi></l>
<l>9. The twin god, Lugalgirra.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>dúg-ga-zu mu-lu ta-zu mu-un-zu</hi></l>
<l>10. As to thy commands, who comprehends thy form?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>taģ-a-zu mu-lu</hi></l>
<l>11. As to thy succor, who comprehends thy form?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>e-ne-em-zu mu-lu</hi></l>
<l>12. As to thy word, who comprehends thy form?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>edin-na di-di edin-na še-ám-du</hi></l>
<l>13. She wanders on the plain, on the plain she wails.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'>ama gašan tin-dib-ba edin-na</hi></l>
<l>14. The mother, queen who gives life to the dead, on the plain wails.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>nin gašan nigín-gar-ra edin-na</hi></l>
<l>15. The queen, lady Nigingar, on the plain wails.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>nin gašan Lara-ak-(ki)-ge<note place='foot'>Probably
part of the great city Isin, see SBP. 160 n. 7.</note> edin-na</hi></l>
<l>16. The queen, lady of Larak, on the plain wails.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>nin gašan I-si-in-na-(ki) edin-na</hi></l>
<l>17. The queen, lady of Isin, on the plain wails.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>nin ama é-dúr<note place='foot'>Probably variant of
<hi rend='italic'>é-dŭr = adurû, kapru</hi>, village, city,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Poebel</hi>, PBS. V 106 IV 30; see also
II Raw. 52, 61 f. Note the similar title of the city of
Bau <hi rend='italic'>uru-azag-ga</hi> in SAK. 274; BL. 147.
Here the title refers to Isin not Lagash.</note>-azag-ga edin-na</hi></l>
<l>18. The queen, mother of the holy city, on the plain wails.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>nin ama ŠU-ḪAL-BI<note place='foot'>Cf.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Craig</hi>, RT. II 16, 18
<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Ama-ŠU-ḪAL-BI-ta</hi>.</note>
edin-na</hi></l>
<l>19. The queen, the ... mother, on the plain wails.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Ba-ú nu-númuz
šág-ga edin-na</hi></l>
<l>20. Bau, the pious woman, on the plain wails.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>éš é-rab-ri-ri umun
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Sá-kut-maģ-a edin-a</hi></l>
<l>21. The abode, Erabriri, of the lord Sakutmah on the plain wails.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>e-lum-e la-lu u-'u-a u-'u-a</hi></l>
<l>22. Oh honored one, the exuberant, alas, alas.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'>96-ám mu-šid-bi-im duppu 3-kam e-lum di-da-ra nu al-tíl</hi></l>
<l>23. Ninety-six is the number of its lines. Third tablet of <hi rend='italic'>Elum
didara</hi>, unfinished.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'>gab-ri Bár-sip-(ki) kima labiri-šu ša-ṭir-ma barim duppu
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Bêl-iḳ-ṣur māri-šu ša
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Bêl-iškun-ni</hi></l>
<l>24. Copy from Barsippa, according to its original, written and collated.
Tablet of Bêlikṣur son of Belishkunni,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>mar Iddin-<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Papsukkal
pa-liḫ <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nabu ina šar-tum la uštešir ù
ina me-riš-tum la u-ša-bi<note place='foot'>Cf. CT. 12, 3<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>
29; <hi rend='italic'>ina šar-tu la uštešir-šu u ina me-riš-tum la i-kal-li</hi>,
<q>By fraud he has not translated it and with wilful readings has he not published
it.</q> For <hi rend='italic'>šutešuru</hi>, <q>to translate or
edit a tablet,</q> see <hi rend='smallcaps'>Lehmann</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Shamash-shum-ukîn</hi>, Taf. XXXIV 17
<hi rend='italic'>akkadû ana šutešuri</hi>, <q>to
translate into Akkadian.</q> On this difficult passage concerning the education of
Ašurbanipal see <hi rend='italic'>Sumerian Grammar</hi>, p. 3 and corrections
by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ungnad</hi> in ZA. 31, 41. <hi rend='italic'>ikalli</hi>
probably for <hi rend='italic'>ukallim</hi>;
note the variant <hi rend='italic'>ušâbi = ušâpi</hi>.</note></hi></l>
<l>25. son of Iddin-Papsukkal worshipper of Nebo. In fraud he has not translated
it and with wilful readings has he not published it.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Babylonian Cult Symbols. 6060 (No. 12)</head>

<p>
Ni. 6060, a Cassite tablet in four columns, yields a notable
addition to the scant literature we now possess concerning Babylonian
mystic symbols. A fragmentary Assyrian copy from the
library of Ašurbanipal was published by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi> as No. 27
of his <hi rend='italic'>Ritual Tafeln</hi>. The Assyrian copy contains only fifteen
symbols with their mystic identifications, in Col. II of the
obverse. The ends of the lines of the right half of Col. I are
preserved on <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi> 27, and these are all restored by the
Cassite original. The obverse of these two restored tablets contained
about sixty symbols with their divine implications. Most of
them are the names of plants, metals, cult utensils and sacrificial
animals, each being identified with a deity. A tablet in the
British Museum, dated in the 174th year of the Seleucid era or
138 B. C., Spartola Collection I 131, published by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Strassmaier</hi>,
ZA. VI 241-4, begins with an astronomical myth concerning the
summer and winter solstices<note place='foot'>Only in a loose sense. From
Tammuz to Kislev is the period of death, from Kislev to
Tammuz the period of revivification of nature. See on
the meaning of this passage <hi rend='smallcaps'>Kugler</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Im Bannkreis Babels</hi> 62-5.</note>
and then inserts a passage on the
mystic meanings of ten symbols. The myth of the solstices
runs as follows:
</p>

<p>
<q>In the month Tammuz, 11th day, when the deities Miniṭṭi
and Kaṭuna, daughters of Esagila,<note place='foot'>Temple of Marduk in Babylon.</note>
go unto Ezida<note place='foot'>Temple of Nebo in Barsippa.</note> and in the
month Kislev, 3d day, when the deities Gazbaba and Kazalsurra,
daughters of Ezida, go unto Esagila&mdash;Why do they go? In the
month Tammuz the nights are short. To lengthen the nights
the daughters of Esagila go unto Ezida. Ezida is the house of
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
night. In the month Kislev, when the days are short, the
daughters of Ezida to lengthen the days go unto Esagila. Esagila
is the house of day.</q> The tablet then explains the Sumerian
ideogram <hi rend='italic'>gubarra</hi>=Ašrat, the western mother goddess Ashtarte,
and says that Ašrat of Ezida is poverty
stricken.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>maš-dū</hi>=<hi
rend='italic'>muškênitu</hi>.</note> But Ašrat of
Esagila is full of light and
mighty.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>šarahitum.</hi>
</note> Some mystic connection
between Ašrat or Geštinanna, mistress of letters and astrology,<note place='foot'>See
<hi rend='italic'>Tammuz and Ishtar</hi>, p. 151. Ašrat or the western Ashtoreth
usually had the title <hi rend='italic'>bêlit
ṣêri</hi>, <q>Lady of the plains</q> and was identified with
the Babylonian Geštinanna and Nidaba.
Hence <hi rend='italic'>[Bêlit-]ṣêri</hi> is
<hi rend='italic'>dupšarrat irṣitm</hi>, scribe of the lower world, K.B.
VI 190,47; cf. IV R. 27 B 29.</note>
scribe of the lower world, and the daughters of night and day
existed. This cabalistic tablet here refers to a mirror which she
holds in her hand and says she appeared on the 15th day to
order the decisions. The 15th of the month Tammuz is probably
referred to or the beginning of the so-called dark period when the
days begin to shorten and Nergal the blazing sun descends to the
lower world to remain 160 days.<note place='foot'>See lines 51-4 of
this tablet. Nergal descends into the earth on the 18th of Tammuz and
remains until the 28th of Kislev.</note> For some reason Ašrat, here
called the queen,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'><hi
rend='vertical-align: super'>ilat</hi>Šarrat</hi>.</note> appears to order the
decisions, probably the fates of those that die. The phrase <q>The
divine queen appeared</q>
is usually said of the rising of stars or astral bodies, but the
reference here is wholly obscure. As a star she was probably
Virgo. At any rate some mystic pantomime must have been
enacted in the month of Tammuz in which the daughters of
Esagila and Ezida and the queen recorder of Sheol were the
principal figures. The pantomime represented the passing of
light, the reign of night and the judgment of the dead. Clearly
an elaborate ritual attended by magic ceremonies characterized
the ceremony. At this point the tablet gives a commentary on
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
the mystic meaning of cult objects used for the healing of the
sick or the atonement of a sinner. Obviously some connection
exists between this mystagogy and the myth described. The
commentary is probably intended to explain the hidden powers
of the objects employed in the weird ritual, at any rate the
mystery is thus explained.<note place='foot'>Here epitomized. It will
be found transcribed and translated by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi> in
his <hi rend='italic'>Zum
Babylonischen Neujahrfest</hi>, p. 129.</note>
</p>

<p>
(1) Gypsum is the god Ninurta.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>MAŠ</hi>. See
below Col. II 15, gypsum is Ninurta, the god of war, primarily a god of light.
Gypsum, Sum. <hi rend='italic'>im-bar</hi>, <q>radiant clay,</q> became
symbolic of Ninurta because of its light transparent
color.</note> (2) Pitch is <hi rend='italic'>the asakku</hi>-demon.<note place='foot'>So,
because gypsum, lime and pitch are smeared on the door of the house and the god of
light (Ninurta) tramples upon the demon of darkness.</note>
(3) Meal water (which encloses the bed of the sick man) is
Lugalgirra and Meslamtaea.<note place='foot'>Two inferior deities
related to Nergal, god of the lower world. Their images placed at the
enclosure of a house prevent the demons, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>,
Rt. 168, 21 f. The image of Lugalgirra
designed on a wall prevents the devils,
<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> 166,12. He binds the evil ones, IV R. 21* C III 26.
The two are placed at the right and left of
a door to forbid the devils to enter. Maklu VI 124.</note>
[A string of wet meal was laid about
the bed of a sick man or about any object to guard them against
demons. Hence meal water symbolizes the two gods who guard
against demons. See especially <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ebeling</hi>, KTA. No. 60 Obv. 8
<hi rend='italic'>zisurrá talamme-šu</hi>, <q>Thou shalt enclose him with meal water.</q>]
</p>

<p>
(4) Three meal cakes are Anu, Enlil and Ea.<note place='foot'>The great trinity:
heaven, earth and sea.</note> (5) The design
which is drawn before the bed is the net which overwhelms all
evil. (6) The hide of a great bull is Anu. [Here the hide of the
bull is the symbol of the heaven god as of Zeus Dolichaîos in
Asia Minor.]
</p>

<p>
(7) The copper gong<note place='foot'>In any case a cult utensil on
which a noise was made, CT. 16, 24, 32.</note> is Enlil. But in our tablet II 13 symbol
of Nergal and in CT. 16, 24, 25 apparently of Anu. The term
of comparison in any case is noise, bellowing.
</p>

<p>
(8) The great reed spears which are set up at the head of the
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
sick man are the seven great gods sons of Išhara. The seven
sons of Išhara are unknown, but this goddess was a water and
vegetation deity closely connected with Nidaba goddess of the
reed.<note place='foot'>See the Chicago Syllabar 230 where she is identified with
Nidaba.</note> The reed, therefore, symbolizes her sons.
</p>

<p>
(9) The scapegoat is Ninamašazagga. Here the scapegoat
typifies the genius of the flocks who supplies the goat. See,
however, another explanation below Obv. II 17.
</p>

<p>
(10) The censer is Azagsud. The deity Azagsud in both
theological and cult texts is now male and now female. As a
male deity he is the great priest of Enlil, CT. 24, 10, 12, and
always a god of lustration closely connected with the fire god
Gibil, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Meek</hi>, BA. X pt. 1 No. 24,4.<note place='foot'>Cf. ZA.
16, 178, 27; BA. V 649, 3; <hi rend='italic'>Shurpu</hi> VIII 10.</note>
But ordinarily Azagsud is
a form of the grain goddess who was also associated with fire in
the rites of purification. As a title of the grain goddess, see
CT. 24, 9, 35 = 23, 17; SBP. 158, 64 <hi rend='italic'>A-sug</hi>
where <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>,
KL. 11 Rev. III 11 has <hi rend='italic'>Azag-sug</hi>. She is frequently associated
with Ninḫabursildu and Nidaba (the grain goddess) in rituals,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, Rt. 126, 27 and 29; 138, 14, etc. The censer probably
symbolizes both male and female aspects, the fire that burns
and the grain that is burned. See below II 9, where the censer
is symbol of Urashâ a god of light.
</p>

<p>
(11) The torch is Nusku the fire god in the Nippur pantheon.
Below (II 10) the torch is Gibil, fire god in the Eridu pantheon.
</p>

<p>
The mystic identifications do not always agree, but the term
of comparison can generally be found if the origin and character
of the deities are known and the nature of the symbol determined.
Each god was associated with an animal and a plant and with
other forms of nature over which they presided. When the cult
utensils are symbols the term of comparison is generally clear.
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
Below will be found such interpretations of these mysteries as
the condition of the tablet and the limits of our knowledge permit.
Most difficult of all are the metal symbols which begin with
Obv. I 10. Here silver is heaven, but it can hardly be explained
after the manner of the same connection of Zeus Dolichaîos
with silver in Kommagene. The cult of this Asiatic heaven
god is said to have been chiefly practiced at a city in the region
of silver mines.<note place='foot'>So A. B. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cook</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Zeus</hi>, 632. I would, however, entertain doubts concerning this
explanation of silver as the emblem of the Asiatic Zeus and of Jupiter Dolichenus. The
identification of this metal with the sky god in Babylonia and Kommagene surely reposes
upon a more subtle idea.
[For the explanation of silver = Anu and gold = Enlil, see p. 342.]</note>
That is an impossible explanation in the case
of Anu whose chief cult center was at Erech. The association
of gold with Enmesharra, here obviously the earth god, is completely
unintelligible. In Obv. I 31 he is possibly associated with
lead or copper as the planet Saturn. In lines I 14-18 the symbols
are broken away, but they are probably based upon astronomy.
Metals seem to be connected with fixed stars and planets on the
principle of color. The metallic symbolism of the planets was
well known to Byzantine writers who did not always agree in
these matters. Their identifications are certainly a Græco-Roman
heritage which in turn repose upon Babylonian tradition.<note place='foot'>The Sabeans,
a pagan Aramaic sect of Mesopotamia at Harran, are said to have assigned
a metal to each planet. Since a considerable part of their religion was derived from
Babylonia we may consider this direct evidence for the Babylonian origin of the entire
tradition. For an account of the metals assigned to the planets by the Babylonians,
Persians, Greeks and Sabeans, see Bousset in <hi rend='italic'>Archiv für
Religionswissenschaft</hi> 1901, article on <q>Die Himmelreise der Seele.</q>
The order of the planets, taken from the Byzantine list above, is based upon their
relative distances from the sun.</note>
The following table taken from <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cook</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Zeus</hi>, p. 626, will illustrate
Græco-Roman ideas on this point:
</p>

<p>
Kronos&mdash;lead (Saturn); Zeus&mdash;silver (Jupiter); Ares&mdash;iron
(Mars); Helios&mdash;gold (Sun); Aphrodite&mdash;tin (Venus); Hermes&mdash;bronze
(Mercury); Selene&mdash;crystal (Moon).
</p>

<p>
Our tablet preserves only the names of the deities at this
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
point, and if metals stood at the left we are clearly authorized
to interpret the divine names in their astral sense. This assumes,
of course, that these astral identifications obtained in the Cassite
period. Assuming this hypothesis we should have the metals
for Betelgeuze, Ursa Major, Venus, Jupiter, Mars, Saturn,
New-moon(?), a star in Orion, Venus as evening and morning
star, Virgo, and perhaps others.
</p>

<p>
The reverse of the tablet is even more mystic and subtle.
The first section connects various cult substances with parts of
the body. White wine and its bottle influence the eyes. White
figs pertain to a woman's breasts. Must or mead have power
over the limbs as the members of motion. Terms of comparison
fail to suggest themselves here and we are completely disconcerted
by the fancy of the Babylonian mystagogue. In the
next section, which is only partially preserved, we have twelve
gods of the magic rituals. The province of each in relation to the
city and state is defined. Kushu, the evil satyr who receives the
sin-bearing scapegoat, hovers over the homes of men. Muḫru,
the deity who receives burnt offerings, or incarnation of the fires
of sacrifice, dwells at the city-gate. Sakkut, a god of light and
war, inexplicably protects the pools. Then follow hitherto
undefined and unknown Cassite deities and a break in the
tablet.
</p>

<p>
As in the Assyrian duplicate, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi> Rt. 27, so also here,
the reverse contains a lexicographical commentary on mythological
phrases. The name of the god <hi rend='italic'>Negun</hi> is commented upon
here and most timely information is given. Both the phonetic
reading of the name and the character of the deity are defined.
The colophon at the end has the usual formula attached to cult
instructions whose contents are forbidden to the uninitiated.
</p>

<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>duk</hi>
a-gub-ba</hi> ... [   ]<note place='foot'>Restoration from Zim. Rt. 27.</note></l>
<l>1. The vessel of holy water ... [of the gods]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-ḫabur-sil-du
nin(?) [tù-tù-ge]<note place='foot'>Conjectural restoration from ASKT.
96, 21. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, Rt. 27 I 3-4 has a longer description
of <hi rend='italic'>[Ninḫabursildu a-ḫa-lat [<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>
A-gub-ba bêlit] mê(?) ša nâri</hi>(?).</note></hi></l>
<l>2. is Ninhabursildu,<note place='foot'>This deity appears in incantations as the
queen of the holy waters <hi rend='italic'>bêlit egubbê</hi>, IV R. 28*b 16;
<hi rend='italic'>Bab.</hi> III 28, Sm. 491, 3. Although placed in the
court of Enlil the earth god as sister of Enlil
by the theologians, CT. 24, 11, 40 = 24, 52, where
she is associated with a special deity of holy
water, <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>A-gub-ba</hi>,
yet by function and character she belongs to the water cult of Eridu. Her
symbol is the holy water jar (<hi rend='italic'>duk</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>agubba</hi>
and the deity <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Agubba</hi> is
<hi rend='italic'>šu-luģ lăg-lăg-ga Erida-ge</hi>,
Purifying handwasher of Eridu, CT. 24, 11, 41 = 24, 53. The river goddess
<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Iă</hi> is also
<hi rend='italic'>bêlit
agubbê</hi>, CT. 16, 7, 255 where in l. 254 <hi rend='italic'>Ninḫabursildu</hi>
is <hi rend='italic'>aḫat <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>A-[gub-ba]</hi>,
sister of <hi rend='italic'>Agubba</hi>, and the
river goddess is mother of Enki, or Ea, god of the sea,
CT. 24, 1, 25. The reading <hi rend='italic'>ḫabur</hi> for
<hi rend='italic'>A-ḪA</hi> is most probable, and the cognate or dialectic
form <hi rend='italic'>ḫubur</hi> is a name for the mysterious sea
that surrounds the world. See BL. 115 n. 2. The holy water over which
she presides is taken
from the <hi rend='italic'>apsu</hi> or nether sea, which
issues from springs, hence <hi rend='italic'>egubbû</hi> is spring water, CT. 17, 5
III 1. The name, then, really means <q>Queen of the lower
world river, she that walks (<hi rend='italic'>du</hi>) the
streets (<hi rend='italic'>sil</hi>).</q> The Semitic scribe
of CT. 25, 49, 6 renders the name in a loose way by <hi rend='italic'>bêlit têlilti
bêlit ālikat sulê [rapšāti]</hi>, Queen of lustration, queen
that walks the [wide] streets (of the lower
world). For the title <hi rend='italic'>bêlit têliltī</hi>, see
CT. 26, 42 I 14. For a parallel to the description of her
walking the streets of inferno, cf.
<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi> Kal-šág-ga sil-dagal-la
edin-na</hi>, Lady of purity who (walks) the
wide streets of the plain (of inferno), consort of Irragal,
god of the lower world, SBP. 158, 59. A
variant, KL. 16 III 8 has <hi rend='italic'>sil-gig-edin-na</hi>,
the dark street, etc.</note> queen of incantations.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>duk</hi>gan-nu-tūr<note
place='foot'>Variant of <hi rend='italic'>kân-tūr</hi>, V Raw. 42, 39.</note></hi>
<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>[ ]MEŠ-GAR</hi></l>
<l>3. The little <hi rend='italic'>hannu</hi>-vessel is the deity ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>giš</hi>šinig
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>A-nim</hi></l>
<l>4. The tamarisk is anu.<note place='foot'>In K. 165 Rev. 8 f. the tamarisk
and date palm are said to be created in heaven (<hi rend='italic'>giš an-na
ù-tŭ</hi>) and the same is said of them in Gudea, Cyl. B 4, 10,
<hi rend='italic'>giš-šinig giš-šeḳḳa</hi> (i. e. = <hi rend='italic'>šig =
gišimmaru</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>an ù-tud-da</hi>. This plant appears frequently
in magic rituals, IV R. 59<hi rend='italic'>b</hi> 4
<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>iṣu</hi> bi-ni</hi> (Semitic), IV R.
16<hi rend='italic'>b</hi> 31, <hi rend='italic'>Shurpu</hi> IX 1-8, and also
in medical texts. <hi rend='italic'>bînu</hi> has been
identified with Syriac <hi rend='italic'>bînā</hi>,
tamarisk. If this identification be correct, a comparison with
the Hebrew legend of the <hi rend='italic'>manna</hi>
(bread of heaven in Psalms 105,40), said to have been
the exudation of the tamarisk, is possible.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>giš</hi>šag-gišimmar<note
place='foot'>Semitic <hi rend='italic'>uḳuru</hi>, Aramaic
<hi rend='italic'>ḳêrā</hi>, see <hi rend='smallcaps'>Meissner</hi>, MVAG. 1913, 2 p.
40 and BE. 31, 69 n. 2. Used both in medicine and magic.</note>
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Dumu-zi</hi></l>
<l>5. The date palm-head is Tammuz.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ú</hi>in-nu-uš<note
place='foot'>Passim in rituals and medicine. See BE. 31, 69, 27;
72, 29; <hi rend='smallcaps'>King</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Magic</hi> 11, 44;
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Meissner</hi>, SAI. 2805.</note>
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>É-a</hi></l>
<l>6. The <hi rend='italic'>mashtakal</hi>-plant is Ea.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>gi</hi>šul-ģi
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-urta</hi></l>
<l>7. the <hi rend='italic'>šalatu</hi>-reed is Ninurta.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ú</hi>el<note
place='foot'>In <hi rend='italic'>Shurpu</hi> VIII 70 mentioned with
<hi rend='italic'>šalālu</hi>. A magic ointment made of the
<hi rend='italic'>El</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>maštakal</hi>,
CT. 34, 9, 41. See also <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ebeling</hi>, KTA. 90 rev. 17;
<hi rend='smallcaps'>King</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Magic</hi> 30, 25. Perhaps identical in
name with the stone <hi rend='italic'>arzallu</hi>, SAI. 8545. On a Dublin
tablet often <hi rend='italic'>giš EL</hi>. Cf. <hi rend='italic'>ú-šig-el-šar</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>šûmu</hi>, onion.</note>
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Ninâ<note place='foot'>For the correct
reading <hi rend='italic'>ni-ná-a</hi>, see AJSL. XXXIII 194, 159.</note></hi></l>
<l>8. The <hi rend='italic'>El</hi>-plant is Niná</l>
</lg>

<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>gišburru<note place='foot'>Here a wood employed in magic,
cf. BE. 31, 60, 6+15. In syllabars <hi rend='italic'>giš-BUR = gišburru,
giškirru</hi>, indicates a weapon or an utensil.</note>
      <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Gir-rá<note place='foot'><hi
rend='italic'>NITA-DU</hi>, fire god, title of Nergal as fire god and identical
with <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi> gĭr</hi> =
Nergal.</note></hi></l>
<l>9. The gišbur wood is the Fire God Girra.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>dāg</hi>kubabbar
     <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>GAL<note place='foot'>Here
certainly <hi rend='italic'>Anu</hi>, heaven god, followed by Earth and Sea gods. Note
also <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Gu-la</hi> in
liturgies <hi rend='italic'>passim</hi> as title of Anu,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>BL.</hi> 136. Anu = Sin, see p. 342.</note></hi></l>
<l>10. Silver is the great god (the moon).</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>dāg</hi>ku-gi
   <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-me-šár-ra<note place='foot'>Title
of Enlil, lord of the totality of decrees. Enlil = Šamaš.</note></hi></l>
<l>11. God is Emmešarra (the sun).</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>dāg</hi>urudu
    <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>É-a</hi></l>
<l>12. Copper is Ea.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>dāg</hi>an-na   
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-maģ</hi></l>
<l>13. Lead is Ninmah.<note place='foot'>Originally title of the great unmarried mother
goddess <hi rend='italic'>bêlit ilāni</hi>, but often a title of the
virgin types Innini and Ninâ, BL. 141; of Gula
<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> Also somewhat frequently she is Damkina,
consort of Ea, IV R. 54<hi rend='italic'>b</hi> 47;
<hi rend='smallcaps'>CT.</hi> 33, 3, 21 her star beside that of Ea. Here she is the mother
goddess and the same order, Heaven, Earth, Sea, Mother Goddess
in <hi rend='italic'>Shurpu</hi> IV 42, where
Nin-maģ has the Var. Nin-tud, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ebeling</hi>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>KTA.</hi> p. 121, 11. Symbols of these four deities on
boundary stones in same register, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Hinke</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>A New Boundary Stone</hi>, p. 28 second register, et passim.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. [   ]<note place='foot'>Possibly a metal stood here, identified with
<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>MAŠ</hi>,
a star in Orion (Kaksidi= Beteigeuze),
<hi rend='smallcaps'>CT.</hi> 33, 2, 6; <hi rend='smallcaps'>King</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Magic</hi> 50, 29.</note>
       <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Ninurta</hi></l>
<l>14. [   ] is Ninurta.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. [   ]       <hi rend='italic'><hi
rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Ninlil<note place='foot'>Possibly the constellation
Ursa Major. Margidda, the Wagon is intended, identified with
Ninlil on a Berlin text, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Weidner</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Handbuch</hi> 79, 10. See also <hi rend='smallcaps'>Bezold</hi>
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>Deimel</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Pantheon
Babylonicum</hi> 215.</note></hi></l>
<l>15. [   ] is Ninlil.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. [   ]       <hi rend='italic'><hi
rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Dilbat</hi></l>
<l>16. [   ] is Ishtar-Venus.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. [   ]       <hi rend='italic'><hi
rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>AMAR-RA-ĠE-UD-DU-A-LU-TU<note place='foot'>From the
context certainly a title of Marduk. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zim.</hi> 27 I 19
omits <hi rend='italic'>LU-TU</hi>.</note></hi></l>
<l>17. [   ] is Marduk-Jupiter.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. [   ]       <hi rend='italic'><hi
rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Lugal-giš-a-tu-gab-liš-a<note place='foot'>Or
<hi rend='italic'>Bêl-ṣarbe</hi>, title of Nergal, v. VAB. IV 170,
67. Between lines 17 and 18 the variant
inserts two lines.</note></hi></l>
<l>18. [   ] is Nergal-Mars.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. [   ] <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi> Sak-kud</hi></l>
<l>19. [   ] is Ninurta-Saturn.<note place='foot'>But Mars in Amos 5, 26. I
accept here the later identifications, Nergal-Mars, Ninurta-Saturn.
The identifications in the earlier period of Babylonian astronomy appear to have been
Ninurta-Mars and Nergal-Saturn.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. [   ] <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nusku<note
place='foot'>Probably the astronomical form of Nusku as
god of the new moon, IV R. 23a 4. His character
as fire god is symbolized by the torch, ZA. VI 242, 24.
In II 10 supply <hi rend='italic'>Gibil</hi> after <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>
RT. 27, 5. As fire god he is messenger of Enlil.</note></hi></l>
<l>20. [   ] is Nusku.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. [   ] <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Pap-sukkal<note
place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Papsukal</hi>, messenger of Zamama, god of Kiš, a
form of Ninurta. He also like Nusku
derives his messenger character from his connection with
light, <hi rend='italic'>Papsukal ša še-ir-ti</hi>, Papsukal of
the morning light, CT. 24, 40, 53. Since Ninurta is identified with Alpha of Orion,
Pap-sukal is
identified with one of the stars in Orion, CT.
33, 2 II 2; <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>mul</hi>sib-zi-an-na
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Pap-sukal
[sukal <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Anim
Ištar]</hi> restored from <hi rend='smallcaps'>Virolleaud</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Supplement</hi> LXVII 10. Here he is messenger of heaven and of
Ishtar as Venus, queen of heaven, that is, he is a messenger of the powers of celestial
light. Nusku and Pap-sukal often occur together in magic texts,
<hi rend='italic'>Shurpu</hi> VIII 10.</note></hi></l>
<l>21. [   ] is Papsukal.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>

<lg>
<l>22. [   -]<hi rend='italic'>šág
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Sak-kut<note place='foot'>Here probably
Sakkut as lord of light and justice, god of Isin, in his normal capacity.
See BL. 120 n. 6. His emblem is something made of date
palm, <hi rend='italic'>šág, gišimmar</hi>. This deity is
unknown in magic texts except in <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, Rt. 70,
8.</note></hi></l>
<l>22. [    ] is Sakkut.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. [   -]<hi rend='italic'>ŠID
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ilu</hi>Ram-ma-nu</hi></l>
<l>23. [    ] is Ramman.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. [    ] <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ilat</hi>Ishtar
Uruk-(ki)</hi></l>
<l>24. [    ] is Ishtar of Erech.<note place='foot'>Ishtar of Erech is Venus as
evening star, the effeminate Venus of Erech, see <hi rend='italic'>Tammuz
and Ishtar</hi>, 54 and 180 n. 4.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. [    ] <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ilat</hi>Ishtar
A-ga-de-(ki)</hi></l>
<l>25. [    ] is Ishtar of Agade.<note place='foot'>Venus as morning star. The
Ishtar of Agade was the type of war goddess, see op. cit. p. 100;
hence Venus as morning star is sometimes called the Bow Star,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Kugler</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sternkunde</hi> II 198.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. [    -]<hi rend='italic'>TAR
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ilat</hi>Be-lit-ṣêri</hi></l>
<l>26. [    ] is Bêlit-ṣeri.<note place='foot'>Western title of Geštinanna,
sister of Ishtar. Here perhaps the constellation Virgo.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. [    ] <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-lil</hi></l>
<l>27. [    ] is Ninlil.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28. [    <hi rend='italic'>ri-]kis-su-nu
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Ninurta</hi></l>
<l>28. [    ] their band(?) is Ninurta.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29. [    ] <hi rend='italic'>ilāni sibitti<note place='foot'>The seven gods
are the Pleiades, CT. 33, 2, 44. Since they are followed by Enmesharra
perhaps here to be identified with the seven sons
of Enmesharra (see BE. 31, 35). In ZA. VI 242,
20 <hi rend='italic'>gi-uru-gal-meš</hi>, <q>the great reed spears</q>
are symbols of the seven great gods, sons of Išhara.
But traces of the last sign are not those of <hi rend='italic'>MEŠ</hi>
here.</note></hi></l>
<l>29. [    ] is the seven gods.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>30. [    ] <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>d.</hi>En-me-šár-ra</hi></l>
<l>30. [    ] is Enmesharra.<note place='foot'>In astronomy a form of Nin-urta =
Saturn, but by character allied to Nergal a lower world
deity. See line 11 above. For E. as Saturn note V Raw.
46<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> 21, his star <hi rend='italic'>UDU-LIM</hi> and II R.
48, 52 the same star is
<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>UDU-BAD-sag-uš =
kaimânu</hi>, Saturn. See also BE. 31, 35 n. 4 line 12,
<hi rend='italic'>kaimānu</hi> title of Enmesharra.</note></l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Obverse II</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>giš</hi> [   ]
[<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi></hi>   ]</l>
<l>2. [    ]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>giš</hi> [   ]
[<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi></hi>   ]</l>
<l>3. [    ]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>giš</hi>šim</hi>
[   ] [<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi></hi>   ]</l>
<l>4. [    ]</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>šim-šal<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>šimeššalû</hi>
employed in medical texts, see SAI. 3574 and <hi rend='smallcaps'>Jastrow</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Medical Text</hi> Rev. 5.
Here also without <hi rend='italic'>giš</hi>. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Holma</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zum assyrischen Lexicon</hi>, p. 85, identified it with Syr.
<hi rend='italic'>šamšārā</hi>, Persian and Arabic <hi rend='italic'>šimšar</hi>.</note>
[<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi></hi>   ]</l>
<l>5. Box-wood is the god....</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>gi-dug-ga<note place='foot'>Passim in medical and incantation
texts, CT. 23, 45, 9; RA. 14, 88, 6; <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ebeling</hi>, KTA.
26 R. 20; IV R. 55 No. 2, 18., etc.</note>
[<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi></hi>   ]</l>
<l>6. The good reed is the god....</l>
</lg>

<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'>šim-li
    <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi></hi>[<hi rend='italic'>Immer<note
place='foot'>Here variant <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zim</hi>. Rt. 27 Obv. II
begins.</note></hi> ]</l>
<l>7. Cypress is Adad.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>šīpāti burrumti<note place='foot'>Written
<hi rend='italic'>sìg dar-a</hi>.</note>
  <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ilu</hi>Labartu(?)<note place='foot'>The name of
this deity is not legible in <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern's</hi> variant
and the first sign of the name
on the Nippur text is doubtful but apparently the <hi rend='italic'>šeššig</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>gunu</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Galu</hi>, that is REC. 100 later
<hi rend='italic'>RAB+GAN</hi>, (v. SAI. p. 155 note 1). After this sign
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi> and I have seen a sign
<hi rend='italic'>KU</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>ŠU</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Labartu</hi> is usually written
<hi rend='italic'>RAB+GAN-ME</hi>. Here we may have to do with some new ideogram
for this deity. She is the daughter of Anu,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Haupt</hi>, ASKT. 94, 59. A prayer to the daughter of
Anu is <hi rend='smallcaps'>King</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Magic</hi> No. 61, 5-21.</note>
mar[at <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ilu</hi>Anim ]</hi></l>
<l>8. Wool of variegated color is <hi rend='italic'>Labartu</hi> daughter of Anu.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>šim-ZU<note place='foot'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Zim.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>SU</hi>.</note>    <hi
rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>[Nin-urta  ]</hi></l>
<l>9. The aromat-ZU is Ninurta.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>nig-na    <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Urašā</hi></l>
<l>10. The censer is Urasha.<note place='foot'>But in ZA. VI 242, 23 symbol of
Azagsud.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>gi-bil-lá
    <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>[   Gi-bil</hi>]</l>
<l>11. The torch is Gibil.<note place='foot'>But ZA. VI 242, 24 Nusku,
fire god in Nippur pantheon.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>ḳu-ta-ri ibbûti<note place='foot'>See
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Muss-Arnolt</hi>, p. 940. Also note
<hi rend='italic'>niknakku ša ḳu-ta-ri</hi>, censer of incense, CT. 29, 50, 9;
<hi rend='italic'>ḳutari ša šipti</hi>, incense pertaining to the ritual of the
incantation, <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> 20. <hi rend='italic'>ḳutari</hi> is a plural
form employed to denote several acts of fumigation.</note>
   <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>[Ne-gun]</hi></l>
<l>12. The clean incense is Negun.<note place='foot'>Reading established by Rev. II
8. But see <hi rend='smallcaps'>Meek</hi>, AJSL 31, 287,
<hi rend='italic'>li-si to ne-su(n)</hi> gloss on the
star <hi rend='italic'>Ne-sùn</hi>; son of Ninlil, hence a star in
Ninlil's constellation Ursa Major, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Virolleaud</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Sin</hi>
XIII 22.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>mul-lil-lum
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Ig[i-BALAG<note place='foot'>Perhaps
<hi rend='italic'>igi-sig-sig</hi>; cf. CT. 24, 3, 25.</note>
lù nu-gisš-šar <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>En-lil-lá]</hi></l>
<l>13. The amphora(?) is Igi-BALAG, gardener of Enlil.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>urudū</hi>nig-kalag-ga<note
place='foot'>In ZA. VI 242, 19, symbol of Enlil. But CT. 16, 24,
25 hero of Anu. In rituals generally
with <hi rend='italic'>kušgugalû</hi>.</note>
   <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-[sar
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nergal]</hi></l>
<l>14. The copper kettledrum is Ninsar,<note place='foot'>Sword bearer
(<hi rend='italic'>nāš patri</hi>) of Enlil, CT. 24, 10, 16.</note> that is Nergal.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. <hi rend='italic'>kuš-gū-gal<note place='foot'>Symbol of Anu in ZA. VI 242,
19.</note>   <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>[NINDA+GUD]</hi></l>
<l>15. The hide of a great bull is NINDA+GUD.<note place='foot'>Priest of
Enlil, CT. 24, 10, 13. Cf. <hi rend='italic'>GUD-NINDA = mîru</hi>, young ox, SBC. 19,
14.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. <hi rend='italic'>im-bar
     <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>[Utu-găl-lu</hi></l>
<l>16. Gypsum is the storm god (Ninurta).<note place='foot'>ZA. VI 242, 15
gypsum is <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>MAŠ</hi>.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. <hi rend='italic'>esir    <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>id</hi></l>
<l>17. Bitumen is the river god.<note place='foot'>But ZA. VI 242, 15
bitumen is the <hi rend='italic'>asakku</hi> demon.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>máš-ģul-dúb-ba-a
    <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>[Ku-šu]</hi></l>
<l>18. The scapegoat is Kushu.<note place='foot'>A pest demon son of Anu,
III R. 69, 70. On the other hand, ZA. VI 246, 22 the scapegoat
represents the patron of flocks Ninamašazag who supplies the goat. When sin is
transferred to the goat it falls under the protection of Kushu. See Rev. I 6.</note></l>
</lg>

<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>

<lg>
<l>19. <hi rend='italic'>udu-ti-la<note place='foot'>Cf.
<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>En-udu-til-la</hi>, SBP. 150 n.
5 I. 8.</note> <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>[Gira]</hi></l>
<l>19. <q>The living lamb</q> is Gira.<note place='foot'>Patron of flocks and fire
god.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. <hi rend='italic'>máš-gi-bil-la
  <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>[Mu-uḫ-]ra</hi></l>
<l>20. The goat of the torch<note place='foot'>That is burnt offering.</note> is
Muḫru.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21. <hi rend='italic'>še-bir-bir-ri u-pu-un-tum</hi></l>
<l>21. <q>Scattered grain(?),</q> chick pea (?)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22. <hi rend='italic'>zērê    ma-ka-lu-ú</hi></l>
<l>22. seed-corn, eating table and</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>duk</hi>ḳa-gaz<hi
rend='vertical-align: super'>pl.</hi>   <hi
rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nun-ŭr-ra  <hi
rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Ea<note place='foot'>I. e. Ea as the god of
potters. Nunurra is <hi rend='italic'>paḫaru rabû</hi> of Anu,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Meek</hi> BA. X pt. 1 p. 42, 14.
Note CT. 24, 14, 41,
<hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Nun-ŭr-ra(duk)
ḳa-[gaz</hi>].</note></hi></l>
<l>23. the <hi rend='italic'>ḳagaz</hi>-pots are Ninurra-Ea.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>giš</hi>ku-ma-nu 7
û-mu<note place='foot'>Sic! Semitic.</note> ku
  <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Marduk</hi></l>
<l>24. The seven (headed) weapon of laurel wood, the storm, the weapon of Marduk.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25. <hi rend='italic'>kù-gi-sig<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>pl.</hi>
    <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>A-nun-na-ki</hi></l>
<l>25. Red sun-disks(?) are the Anunnaki.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26. <hi rend='italic'>kù-gi nig-máš-zid<note place='foot'>Cf. IV R. 28* No. 4
Rev. 3. The symbols in lines 24-6 are obscure.</note>
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Maš-tab-ba-gal-ga</hi></l>
<l>26. <hi rend='italic'>The golden sacred kid</hi>(?) is the Great
Twins.<note place='foot'>Lugalgirra and Meslamtaea.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27. <hi rend='italic'>maš-dū    <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Un-gal
Nibru-<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ki</hi><note place='foot'>The temple of
Gula and Ungal of Nippur, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Clay</hi>, BE. XV 34, 2.
<hi rend='italic'>Ungal</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>tênisêti</hi>, population.
God of the people of Nippur.</note></hi></l>
<l>27. The kid is Ungal<note place='foot'>See previous footnote.</note> of Nippur.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28. <hi rend='italic'>kur-gi-(ģu)
    <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Nin-sîg</hi></l>
<l>28. The crane is Ninsig.<note place='foot'>A form of Enki
as patron of metallurgy. See RA. 12, 83 n. 5.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29. <hi rend='italic'>sún<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>sun</hi> probable
reading for <hi rend='italic'>BAD</hi> in this sense. Offerings to the
<hi rend='italic'>giš-sun</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Genouillac</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Drehem</hi>,
5505 Obv. II 15.</note> <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>giš</hi>erin
šita<note place='foot'>Sign a confusion of <hi rend='italic'>NI+giš</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>KAK+giš</hi>, see RA. 13, 3.</note>
  <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Zi-i</hi></l>
<l>29. The <hi rend='italic'>sun</hi> of cedar, weapon of
Zu.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Zû</hi>, the eagle, bird of the blazing
sun, Ninurta, Ningirsu, is the only emblematic animal that
figures as a deity. The myth of his conflict with the
serpent in the story of Etana dramatizes
the old legend of the conflict between sun and clouds.
He appears in magic here for the first time.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>30. <hi rend='italic'>làl ... <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>[    ]</hi></l>
<l>30. Honey ... is the god ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31. <hi rend='italic'>lí ... li</hi></l>
<l>31. Oil ... oil ...</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>íd
    <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi></hi>[    ]</l>
<l>32. ... River-god, god...</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reverse I</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>karanu ellu ḳaḳḳul-ti enâ-šu</hi></l>
<l>1. White wine and bottle are his eyes.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>tittu piṣîtu<note place='foot'>See Vab. IV 154, 44 and
note.</note>    tulê-šu<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>šu</hi> here for
<hi rend='italic'>ša</hi>, feminine. The form should be dual.</note></hi></l>
<l>2. The white fig is her breasts.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>iṣu</hi>nurmû
     bir-ka-a-šu</hi></l>
<l>3. The <hi rend='italic'>nur</hi>-fig is his (her) knees.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>tittu<note place='foot'>Gunu of <hi rend='italic'>MA</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>tittu</hi>; Sumerian <hi rend='italic'>peš</hi>, value also
assigned to <hi rend='italic'>MA</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>tittu</hi> in the Chicago
Syllabar, 115 f.</note>   ki-sal-la-a-šu</hi></l>
<l>4. The fig is his (her) loins.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>mirsu       pit puridi-šu</hi></l>
<l>5. Must is his (her) crotch.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Ku-ši     ṣêr
      ki-i-ṣi<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>kīṣu</hi>, compensation for
<hi rend='italic'>kiṣṣu</hi>. See also <hi rend='smallcaps'>Strassmaier</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Nabonidus</hi> 699, 24, <hi rend='italic'>ki-ṣu</hi>. Note that
the <hi rend='italic'>ḫulduppu</hi> (probably an image of a scapegoat) symbol
of Kuši is placed opposite the door in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Zim</hi>. Rt. p. 168, 29.</note></hi></l>
<l>6. The god Kushu over the chamber.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Mu-uḫ-ra
ina pan abulli</hi></l>
<l>7. Muḫru before the city gate.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Sak-kut
ina ḳabal appari</hi></l>
<l>8. Sakkut in the midst of the pool.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Si-lak-ki<note
place='foot'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Clay</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Personal Names
of the Cassite Period</hi>, mentions a deity <hi rend='italic'>Si-lak-ku-ku</hi>(?).
In any case a Cassite deity not mentioned in Babylonian lists and texts.</note>
ina ma-na-ḫa-ti</hi></l>
<l>9. Silakki in the ruins.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>E-ḳu-rum<note
place='foot'>Otherwise unknown. A Cassite deity(?).</note> ina libbi šêr išdi</hi></l>
<l>10. Ekurum in the leg.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Ab-ba-
gu-la<note place='foot'>Probably same as <hi rend='italic'>Abagal</hi>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Deimel</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Pantheon</hi>, p. 43.</note>
ina igari</hi></l>
<l>11. Abbagula in the wall.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi> ? ?
ina nasikati</hi></l>
<l>12. [ ] in the fortress.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13-17. ........................</l>
<l>13-17.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. <hi rend='italic'>12 ilāni</hi> [ ]</l>
<l>18. Twelve gods.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reverse II</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>[SAG-GĬR]-ME ša ina pani-šu namru<note place='foot'>Cf.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, 27 R. 14-17.</note></hi></l>
<l>1. The battle which before him gleams.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>[ KU]-ŠÚ la<note place='foot'>Written NU.
Cf. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimmern</hi>, 27 Rev. I 19.</note> maḫ-ru</hi></l>
<l>2. ... not are received.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>[ -]u:NU: la-a</hi></l>
<l>3. [ ]<hi rend='italic'>NU</hi> = not.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4. <hi rend='italic'>[ BT:]šu-u<note place='foot'>Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> 21.</note>:ILA:ma-ḫa-ri</hi></l>
<l>4. [ ]<hi rend='italic'>BI</hi> = that: <hi rend='italic'>ILA</hi> = to present.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>

<lg>
<l>5. <hi rend='italic'>[<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Ne-gun] erim-bi
nu-tuk-a ai-bi ina ḳatê-šu la uṣûni</hi></l>
<l>5. Negun who foes has not. The wicked from his hand escape not.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>NE-RU:ai-bi:ID:ḳa-ti:TUK-A SAL-ŠEŠ</hi>?</l>
<l>6. <hi rend='italic'>NE-RU</hi> = wicked : <hi rend='italic'>ID</hi> = hand : ? ?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d.</hi>Ne-gun<note
place='foot'>Sign is <hi rend='italic'>ḪU-gunu</hi> an error for
<hi rend='italic'>SI-gunu</hi>. Only the latter sign has the values bright, burn.
Line 8 proves that the sign is based on <hi rend='italic'>SI</hi>.</note>
ḳa-lu-ú    i-ša-tam</hi></l>
<l>7. Negun is he that burns with fire.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8. <hi rend='italic'>ḪU-gunu</hi>[1agin]<hi rend='italic'>:gu-nu-u:SI:ḳa-lu-u</hi></l>
<l>8. The <hi rend='italic'>gunu</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>ḪU</hi> has
the syllabic value <hi rend='italic'>gunū:si(g)</hi> = to burn.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>NE:i-ša-tu:sa-niš ka-lu ni-ka</hi></l>
<l>9. <hi rend='italic'>NE</hi> = fire: Or = to consume offerings in fire.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>SAL-ŠEŠ<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>nīn-muš</hi>.
The sign <hi rend='italic'>ŠEŠ</hi> has the value <hi rend='italic'>muš</hi>.
Note SAI. 2629 the gloss <hi rend='italic'>ga-an-ŠEŠ</hi> and
variant <hi rend='italic'>Chicago Syllabar</hi> 212 <hi rend='italic'>ga-an-muš</hi>.
See also JRAS. 1905, 81-4-28 l. 14. For <hi rend='italic'>muš = banû</hi>
cf. SAI. 1916.</note>:ba-nu-ú:    ga-lu</hi></l>
<l>10. <hi rend='italic'>ninmuš</hi> = blaze, burn.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>SI:ba-nu-ú:NE    ga-lu</hi></l>
<l>11. <hi rend='italic'>si(g)</hi> = blaze: <hi rend='italic'>bil = burn</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>12. <hi rend='italic'>mûdû mûdâ li-kal-lim</hi></l>
<l>12. Let the knowing inform the knowing.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13. <hi rend='italic'>la mûdû ul immar</hi></l>
<l>13. He that knows not may not read.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>ki-ma labiri-šu
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ilu</hi>Ninurta-naṣir   mar Ilu-iḳîša
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>amelu</hi>ašipu išṭur bûši E-šu-me-rá</hi></l>
<l>According to its original Ninurtu-naṣir son of Ilu-iḳiša, the priest of magic wrote.
It is the property of the temple Ešumera.<note place='foot'>This is a
real library note and is clear evidence for assuming that the temple of Nippur
possessed a library, at least in the Cassite period. For similar library notes on
the tablets from Aššur, see RA. 13, 99. Note also the Smith Esagila tablet
published by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Scheil</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Memoires de
l'Academie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres XXXIX</hi>, Rev. 7,
<hi rend='italic'>mûdû mûdâ likallim la mûdâ ul
immar an pî duppi gabri Barsip-ki šaṭir-ma UB-ṬU ù ba-ri</hi>.
For <hi rend='italic'>an pi (KA)</hi>, see RA. 13, 92.</note></l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Addendum On Obv. I 10 F.</head>

<p>
Anu in this passage really denotes Sin, the moon, which
has been connected with silver on account of its color. The
identification of Anu, the heaven god, with the moon god rests
upon the astronomical connection between the moon and the
summer solstice, see <hi rend='smallcaps'>Weidner</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der Babylonischen
Astronomie</hi>, 32. Sin is called <q>Anu of heaven,</q>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>King</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Magic</hi>,
No. I, 9, and for the connection with silver, see <hi rend='smallcaps'>Virolleaud</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Astrologie</hi>, Supplement, V II,
<hi rend='italic'>kaspu <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ilu</hi> A-nu huraṣu
<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ilu</hi> Enlil
erû <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ilu</hi> Ea</hi>.
Enlil is connected with gold in <hi rend='smallcaps'>Virolleaud</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Astrologie</hi>, Second Supplement, XVII
14, and Enlil is not infrequently
identified with Shamash, see p. 158, 1-2 and p. 308, 18,
and gold is the traditional metal of the sun.
</p>

<p>
The Greek identification of Zeus, the sky-god, with silver is
certainly borrowed from Babylonia; see p. <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Description Of Tablets</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1cm} p{1cm} p{5cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(7) lw(7) lw(50)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Number in this Volume</hi></cell>
     <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Museum Number</hi></cell>
     <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Description</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>1</cell><cell>13856</cell>
     <cell>Large two column tablet. Unbaked; light
brown with dark spots. Top broken away
and left lower corner damaged. H. 6-½ inches;
W. 4-¼; T. 1-¾ - ¾. Liturgy of the cult of
Ishme-Dagan. See pages <ref target='Pg245'>245-257</ref>.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2</cell><cell>11005</cell><cell>Upper part of a large two column tablet.
Unbaked; light brown. Top and left edge
of the fragment damaged. H. 3-¾; W. 3-¾;
T. 1-½ - ¾. Liturgy of Ishme-Dagan. See
pages <ref target='Pg258'>258-259</ref>.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3</cell><cell>7847</cell><cell>Dark brown unbaked tablet. Right upper
corner slightly damaged. Right lower corner
broken away. Two columns. H. 8; W. 5-¼;
T. 1 - ½. Mythological hymn to Innini. The
obverse is translated on pages <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> to
<ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, but
the reverse is too badly damaged to permit
an interpretation. The text ends with the
line, <q>Oh praise Innini,</q> the literary note
characteristic of epical compositions. The
scribe adds a note stating that there are 153
lines. Written by the hand of <hi rend='italic'>Lugal-ģe-a</hi> ...
son of <hi rend='italic'>E-a-i-lù</hi>(?)....</cell></row>
<row><cell>4</cell><cell>7878</cell><cell>Light brown
fragment from the left upper corner
of a large unbaked tablet. H. 3-½; W. 1-½ - 1;
T. 1-½ - 1. Duplicate of 7847. This tablet
omits the liturgical note, <q>Oh praise Innini.</q>
It has the colophon, <q>Written by the hand of
<hi rend='italic'>Ninurash-mu</hi>..., in the presence of
<hi rend='italic'>Nidaba-igi-pa</hi>(?)-...<hi rend='italic'>ģe-en</hi>.</q></cell></row>
<row><cell>5</cell><cell>15204</cell><cell>Single column, dark brown tablet. Partly
baked. Left lower corner broken away.
H. 4-½; W. 2-½; T. 1-¼ - ½. Psalm to Enlil.
See pages <ref target='Pg265'>265-268</ref>.</cell></row>
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
<row><cell>6</cell><cell>2154</cell><cell>Single Column, light brown tablet. Top and
left lower corner broken. H. 4-¼; W. 2-½;
T. 1-¼-½. Lamentation for Lagash. See
pages <ref target='Pg268'>268-272</ref>.</cell></row>
<row><cell>7</cell><cell>8097</cell><cell>Single column, light brown tablet. Lower edge
damaged. H. 4-¼; W. 2-¼;  T. ¾-½. Liturgical
hymn to Sin. See pages <ref target='Pg276'>276-279</ref>.</cell></row>
<row><cell>8</cell><cell>346</cell><cell>Single column, dark unbaked tablet. Damaged
at top and bottom. H. 4; W. 2-½; T. 1--½.
Bilingual hymn. See plate <ref target='Plate_86'>86</ref>.</cell></row>
<row><cell>9</cell><cell>8334</cell><cell>Single column, light brown tablet, unbaked.
Left upper corner and top of reverse damaged.
H. 4-¾; W. 2-½; T. 1-¼-½. Hymn to Innini.</cell></row>
<row><cell>10</cell><cell>8533</cell><cell>Upper part of a large two column tablet. Light
brown, soft and crumbling. Purchased by
the Expedition in 1895, from Abu Hatab.
H. 3-¼; W. 5-½; T. 1-¼-½. Hymn to Enlil.</cell></row>
<row><cell>11</cell><cell>7080</cell><cell>Large light brown tablet; five columns; broken
perpendicularly at the middle. Isin period.
H. 8-¼; W. 4; T. 2. Liturgy to Enlil. Lamentation
for the city of Ur. See pages <ref target='Pg279'>279-285</ref>.</cell></row>
<row><cell>12</cell><cell>6060</cell><cell>Nearly complete tablet; baked. Temple
library (IV). Second Exp. Two column
tablet; Cassite period. H. 4; W. 3-½; T. 1-½.
Cult symbols. See pages <ref target='Pg320'>320-342</ref>.</cell></row>
<row><cell>13</cell><cell>B.M. 78239</cell><cell>Upper half of large single column
tablet. Light brown, partially baked. H. 7; W. 6; T. 2.
Acquired by the British Museum in 1888.
Late Babylonian edition of the third tablet
of the liturgy <hi rend='italic'>elum didara</hi> to Enlil. See
pages <ref target='Pg323'>323-329</ref>.</cell></row>
<row><cell>14</cell><cell>11327</cell><cell>Lower part of a large unbaked tablet, two
columns. Right half almost wholly broken
away. Myth of the water god Enki. H. 6;
W. 6-½; T. 1-¾. Probably a <hi rend='italic'>zag-sal</hi> hymn.</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index Of Tablets</head>

<p>
Tablets in this Volume.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'r r'; tblcolumns: 'rw(10) rw(8)'">
<row><cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Museum Number</hi></cell>
     <cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Number in this Volume</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>346</cell><cell>8</cell></row>
<row><cell>2154</cell><cell>6</cell></row>
<row><cell>6060</cell><cell>12</cell></row>
<row><cell>7080</cell><cell>11</cell></row>
<row><cell>7847</cell><cell>3</cell></row>
<row><cell>7848</cell><cell>4</cell></row>
<row><cell>8097</cell><cell>7</cell></row>
<row><cell>8334</cell><cell>9</cell></row>
<row><cell>8533</cell><cell>10</cell></row>
<row><cell>11005</cell><cell>2</cell></row>
<row><cell>11327</cell><cell>14</cell></row>
<row><cell>13856</cell><cell>1</cell></row>
<row><cell>15204</cell><cell>5</cell></row>
<row><cell>B.M. 78239</cell><cell>13</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
Other Tablets Translated Or Discussed
</p>

<p>
Nies 1315, Tablet Virolleaud, <ref target='Pg290'>290-308</ref>
</p>

<p>
Poebel, PBS. V No. 26, <ref target='Pg272'>272-276</ref>
</p>

<p>
Myhrman, PBS. I No. 5, Radau, BE. 30, No. 2, <ref target='Pg285'>285-290</ref>
</p>

<p>
Myhrman, PBS. I No. 8, <ref target='Pg309'>309-310</ref>
</p>

<p>
Zimmern, KL. No. 11, <ref target='Pg290'>290-308</ref>
</p>

<p>
Zimmern, <hi rend='italic'>Ritual Tafeln</hi>, No. 27, <ref target='Pg330'>330-340</ref>
</p>

<p>
Ashmolean Prism, <ref target='Pg311'>311-323</ref>
</p>

<p>
Strassmaier, ZA. VI 241-4, <ref target='Pg330'>330-333</ref>
</p>

<p>
Reisner, SBH. No. 18, <ref target='Pg327'>327-329</ref>
</p>

<p>
Reisner, SBH. No. 21, <ref target='Pg292'>292-297</ref>
</p>

<p>
Reisner, SBH. No. 22, <ref target='Pg292'>292-295</ref>
</p>

<p>
Reisner, SBH. No. 25, <ref target='Pg300'>300-302</ref>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index To Vol. X</head>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>abal</hi>, irrigator, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abbagula (deity), <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>agubba</hi>, vessel, symbol of Ninhabursildu, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aja (goddess), <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Allat (goddess), <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, 20.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>am, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Am</hi>, title of Ea, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ama-šuhalbi, title of mother goddess, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>, 19.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ama-ušum-gal, title of Tammuz, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Annigarra, temple in Isin, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anu (god), <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>; <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>; <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>; <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>; <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>; <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>; <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Identified with the moon god, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anunnaki (gods), <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, 2; <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>; <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>; <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arabu, bird of Enlil, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aralu, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, 23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aruru (goddess), sister of Enlil, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ašimur, title of moon god, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>, 17 and 22; <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ašnan (goddess), <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>; <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ašširgi (god), <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>; <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>; <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>; <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>; <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ašte, temple in Larak, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Azagsud (<hi rend='italic'>ilu</hi>), title of grain goddess, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, 10; <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylon (city), <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>, 22.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>balag-di</hi>, choral phrase, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, 14; <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, 26.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barsippa (city), <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>, 23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bau (goddess), <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>; <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Belit-ṣêri (goddess), <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bel-ṣarbe, title of Nergal, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>bitumen, symbol of river god, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canonical liturgies, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref> ff.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>censer, symbol of Urashā, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>copper, symbol of Ea, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>crane, bird symbol of Ninsig, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Damgalnunna (goddess), <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>; <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Damu, title of Tammuz, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, 6:14; <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, 28.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>date-palm, symbol of Tammuz, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dilbat (goddess), <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dilmun (ki), <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, 14:19.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>dog, seven-headed, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duazag, sanctuary, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>, 7; <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>dumu-sag</hi>, title of Tašmet, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref>, 4:5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>dingir dumu-sag</hi> (= Nappasi = Ninmungara) is probably a title of Ninlil, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, 13. See <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> note 6 and SBP. 150 note 5, line 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ea (god), <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-anna, temple of Ištar in Erech, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>, 20.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-barra, temple of the sun god, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-daranna, chapel of Ea in Esagila, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-dimma, temple, royal chapel in Ekur, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-durazagga, epithet of Isin, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>, 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-galmah, temple at Isin, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, 19.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>e-gi-a</hi>, bride, title of Zarpanit, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref>, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-Ibi-anum, temple in Dilbat, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-Ibe-šagud, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-kua, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref>, 19.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-kur, temple of Enlil, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>; <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>; <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>; <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>; <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>; <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref>; <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ekurum (god), <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>

<lg>
<l>E-lamma, chapel or temple of Ninlil at Nippur, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>el</hi>-plant, symbol of Ninā, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-maha, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>, 27 and note.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-mahtila, chapel in Ezida, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-mudkurramu, chapel (?) in Ur (?), <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, 6:10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-namtila, chapel of Ekur, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enanun, title of mother goddess, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, 7; <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enbul (god), son of Ešabba, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, 21 = SBP. 15216 and CT. 24, 23, 127.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Var. <hi rend='italic'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>A-an-bu-bu</hi>, CT. 24, 6, 33.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Endašurimma, title of Enlil, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>En-duazag, title of Enlil, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>EN-HAR(ki), <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>; <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>; <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>; <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>; <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enki (god), <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, 16; <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>; <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>; <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enlil (god), <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>; <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>; <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>; <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>; <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>; <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>; <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>; <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>; <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>; <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>; <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>; <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>; <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>; <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>; <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>; <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>; <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>; <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>; <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>; <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>; <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>. As sun god, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>, 18 and 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enlilsi, deified king, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, 20.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enmešarra (god), <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, 11; <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, 30.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Enmenšarra, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enul, title of Enlil, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Enmul, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enuttilla, title of Enlil, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-rabriri, temple of sakkut, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>, 21.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erech (city), <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>; <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>; <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>; <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eridu (city), <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, 16; <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>, 31.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-šabba, temple of Gula in Šuruppak, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, 6; <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, 21;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ilat</hi>Suddam is mother of Ešabba, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, 32.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>See <hi rend='italic'>Suddam</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-sagila, temple of Marduk, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>; <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-šagnamsar, temple in Dilmun, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, 14:19.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-šamah, temple of Ninurta, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>, 7; see BL. p. 135.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-šarra, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, 16.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ninurta is son of E-šár-ra, BL. No. 9, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mythological chamber in Ekur, SBP. 221 n. 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ištar weeps for <hi rend='italic'>E-šár-e</hi>, KL., 123, Obv. II 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ešnunak (city), <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>, 27.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-šumera, temple of Ninurta in Nippur, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>, 6; <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-temenanki, stage tower in Babylon, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-zida, temple of Nebo, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>gannu-tur</hi>, vessel, symbol of a deity, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>gepar</hi>, dark chamber, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, 24; <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>; <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>geštinanna (goddess), <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gibil, firegod, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, 11; <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>gidugga</hi>, reed, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Girra, firegod, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>gišburru</hi>, a wood, symbol of firegod, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>gisgigal</hi>, antiphon, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>, 24; <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, 23; <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, 26; <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gišzida (god), <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>gold, symbol of sun, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>gudede</hi>, title of Ninlil, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gula (goddess), consort of Tammuz, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gunura, title of mother goddess, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, 5; <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, 27 = SBP. 160, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guškinbanda, title of Ea, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>gypsum, symbol of Ninurta, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hallab (city), <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>; <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Historical poems, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ibi-Sin, king of Ur, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Id (deity), river god or goddess, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>; <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>; <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Igibalag (deity), <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Immer (god), <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>; <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>; <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>; <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, 7.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>

<lg>
<l>incense, symbol of Negun, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Innini (goddess), <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>; <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irriš (god), title of Ninurta, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, 23 = SBP. 160, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isin (city), <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>. Queen of Isin, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, 25; <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Išme-Dagan, deified king, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>; <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>; <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>; <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>; <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ištar, goddess of Erech, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, 24;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Agade, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, 25.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>kagaz</hi>, pot, symbol of Ea, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kenur, chapel of Ninlil in Ekur, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>; <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>; <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keš (city), southern and northern Keš, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>southern Keš, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>; <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>; <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>; <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kingaludda, messenger of the Word, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>kinsig</hi>, a chamber, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kišegunura, title of Urašā, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>kišub</hi>, prayer in liturgies, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>; <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>; <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>; <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>; <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>kušgugalû</hi>, hide of an ox, symbol of Nindagud, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kušu (deity), <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>; <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lagash (city), <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>; <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Larak (city), <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>, 16; <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, 9 and 20.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>lead, symbol of Ninmah, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Libit-Ištar, deified king, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liturgical compositions and compilations, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref> ff. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lugalbanda (god), <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lugalgirra (god), <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lumma (deity), <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mama (god), title of Sin, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marduk (god), <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>; <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref>; <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>; <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>mašgibilla</hi>, burnt offering, symbol of the god Muhra, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>mašḫuldubbû, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maštabba (god), <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>. Maštabba-galgal, twin gods, Gemini, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>maštakal</hi>-plant, symbol of Ea, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>metals of planets, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>mi-ib</hi>-weapon, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, 22.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Muhra (god), <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>; <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Musical instruments, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, 23; <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>, 29; <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, 33; <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, 22; <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>, 27.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nanā (goddess), <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref>, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nannar, god of new moon, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Son of Enlil, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>, 22; <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>, 12; <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>; <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>, 19; <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>, 1; <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nappasi (goddess), <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref> n. 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nebo (god), <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>; <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>; <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Negun (god), <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, 12. Firegod, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nergal (god), <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>; <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nigin marra, title of mother goddess, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, 8; <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>nigkalalagû</hi>, kettle drum, symbol of Nergal, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ninā (goddess), <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>; <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ninazu (god), title of Nergal, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, 47.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nindagud (god), <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, 15; <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nindašurimma, mother name of Enlil, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nin-duazag, mother name of Enlil, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ningal (goddess), <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ningišzida (god), <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, 20.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ninhabursildu (goddess), <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ninharsag (goddess), <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>;  <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>; <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>; <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ninkarnunna (goddess), <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ninki, mother name of Enlil, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>; <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ninliga (goddess), <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ninlil (goddess), <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>; <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>; <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>; <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>; <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>; <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>; <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ninmah (goddess), <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ninmar(ki), goddess of, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, 5.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>

<lg>
<l>Ninsar, title of Nergal, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ninsig, title of Ea as god of metallurgy, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, 28; <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ninsun (goddess), <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nintud (goddess), <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>; <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>; <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>; <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ninul, Nimul, mother names of Enlil, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>; <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ninurašā (god), <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>; <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>; <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>; <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>; <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ninurra, title of Ea, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ninzianna, title of Ninlil, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nippur (city), <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>; <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>; <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>; <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>; <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nunammir, title of Enlil, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nusku, firegod, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, 20; <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Opis (city). Northern and southern Opis, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>See Keš.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papsukkal (god), <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, 21.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papilsag, god of Larak, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Queen of heaven, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ramman (god), <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sadarnunna, consort of Nusku, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, 15; SBP. 152 note 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>sagar</hi>, liturgical rubric, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>, 16; <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sakkut (god), <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sakkutmah, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>, 21.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>See also <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, 19; <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, 22.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>šalālu</hi>, plant, symbol of Ninurta, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Šamaš (god), <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>šarur</hi>-weapon, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>, 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>šattam</hi>, religious title, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Šentur, title of Ninlil, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Šerah (god), Semitic title of Serpent-god as patron of vegetation, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, 16 = SBP. 152, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>seven gods, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, 29; <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>seven-headed weapon, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silakki (god), <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>silver, metal of Anu, i. e., moon god, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>šimli</hi>, cypress, symbol of Adad, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>šimšal</hi>-wood, symbol of a deity, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>šimzu</hi>, an aromat, symbol of Ninurta, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sin (god), <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>; <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>; <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Single song services, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>šipatu</hi>, wool, symbol of Labartu, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sippar(ki), <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>, 21.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sirar(ki), <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suddam, title of Gula, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, 32 = SBP. 160, 18.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For this title of Gula of Šuruppak, see p. 177 n. 4 in part 2 of this volume. Usually a title of Aja or Ishtar as deities of light. Since <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi> Sukurru or Gula of Šuruppak is the same as <hi rend='italic'>Suddam</hi> mother of Ešabba, the temple Ešabba must be located in Šuruppak.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Šulpae, title of Enlil, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>; <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>šumer, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>; <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Šunirda, title of the goddess Aja, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Šuruppak (city), <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>, 20; <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>, 25.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Symbols of deities, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> ff.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>tallu</hi>, part of a door, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>, 20.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>tammarisk, symbol of Anu, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tammuz (god), <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>; Hymn of, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>; <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>tirazagga</hi>, sacred grove, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, 17.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Titular litanies, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>; <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> ff.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ubšukkinna, hall of assembly, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uddagubba, messenger of the Word, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>udutila</hi>, symbol of Girra, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, 19.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>

<lg>
<l>Ur (city), <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>; <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>; <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>; <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>; <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ungal (god), <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>; cf. <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, 31.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Urašā (god), <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref>; <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, 6; <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>; <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ur-Engur, cult hymn of, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Urumaš (god), <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>urusagga</hi>, chief city, title of Isin, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, 16; <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, 24.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Utta-edde (god), <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, 17 = SBP. 158, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weeping mother, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>; <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Word, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, 28; <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, 29; <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>; <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>; <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>; <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>, 22; <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hymn to the Word, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>zagsal</hi>, rubric, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> ff.; <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>, 37.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zarpanit (goddess), <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>; <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref>; <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeus Dolichaeos, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>. His connection with silver borrowed from Babylonia, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zir (goddess), wife of Nannar, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zu (god), the eagle as symbol of the sun, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, 29.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Autographed Texts</head>

<p>
Plate LXXI. 1. Obverse. Col. 1.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxi.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate LXXII. 1. Obverse. Col. 2.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxii.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate LXXIII. 1. Reverse. Col. 1.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxiii.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate LXXIV. 1. Reverse. Col. 2.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxiv.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate LXXV. 2. Obverse.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxv-a.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
2. Reverse.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxv-b.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate LXXVI. 3. Obverse. Col. 1 Initial.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxvi.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate LXXVII. 3. Obverse. Col. 1 Continued.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxvii-a.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
3. Obverse. Col. 2 Initial.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxvii-b.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate LXXVIII. 3. Obverse. Col. 2 Continued.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxviii-a.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
3. Reverse. Col. 1 Initial.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxviii-b.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate LXXIX. 3. Reverse. Col. 1 Continued.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxix-a.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
3. Reverse. Col. 2 Initial.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxix-b.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate LXXX. 3. Reverse. Col. 2 Continued.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxx-a.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
4. Obverse.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxx-b.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
4. Reverse.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxx-c.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate LXXXI. 5. Obverse.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxxi.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate LXXXII. 5. Reverse.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxxii.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate LXXXIII. 6. Obverse.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxxiii.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate LXXXIV. 6. Reverse.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxxiv.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate LXXXV. 7. Obverse.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxxv-a.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
7. Reverse.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxxv-b.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate LXXXVI. 8. Obverse.
<anchor id='Plate_86'/>
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxxvi-a.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
8. Reverse.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxxvi-b.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate LXXXVII. 9. Obverse.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxxvii-a.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
9. Reverse.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxxvii-b.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate LXXXVIII. 10. Obverse. Col. 1. (Col. 2 Destroyed)
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxxviii.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate LXXXIX. 10. Reverse. Col. 1.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxxix-a.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
10. Reverse. Col. 2.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-lxxxix-b.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate XC. 11. Obverse. Col. 3 Initial.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-xc.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate XCI. 11. Obverse. Col. 3 Continued.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-xci-a.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
11. Obverse. Col. 4 Initial.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-xci-b.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate XCII. 11. Obverse. Col. 4 Continued.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-xcii.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate XCIII. 11. Obverse. Col. 4 Final.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-xciii-a.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
11. Obverse. Col. 5 Initial.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-xciii-b.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate XCIV. 11. Obverse. Col. 5 Continued.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-xciv.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate XCV. 11. Reverse. Col. 1. Initial.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-xcv.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate XCVI. 11. Reverse. Col. 1 Continued.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-xcvi-a.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
11. Reverse. Col. 2 Initial.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-xcvi-b.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate XCVII. 11. Reverse. Col. 2 Continued.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-xcvii-a.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
11. Reverse. Col. 3. Initial.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-xcvii-b.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate XCVIII. 11. Col. 3 Continued.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-xcviii.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate XCIX. 12. Obverse. Cols. 1 and 2.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-xcix.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate C. 12. Reverse. Cols. 1 and 2.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-c.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate CI. 13. Obverse.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-ci.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate CII. 13. Reverse.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-cii.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate CIII. 14. Obverse. Col. 1
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-ciii.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate CIV. 14. Obverse. Col. 2.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-civ-a.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
14. Reverse. Col. 1.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-civ-b.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Plate CV. 14. Reverse. Col. 2.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-cv.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Plate of cuneiform tablet.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
